aad
A backward look is fraught with danger;
a ball here, there a children's party;
a ball in Petersburg; but fun
A ball: the joy of every guest!
''Abandon hope for evermore.''9
a bit provincial and affected,
a blank default would suit me better.
a blessing from its blasts and rages,
a block of snow will slip and tumble.
a book of household calculations,
about one thing, till our next meeting.
about them - nineteen to the dozen --
about what's buried in the past:
above a stream the moon had lighted.
above the dust of his remains
above the water started tracing
a brook flows through a grove of lime.
absorbed me in the recollection
a calculation past despising --
a carving-knife - and in the tangle
accounts, shaved forelocks,4 Sunday bath;
accounts were done, a winter outing
a cheerful glimmer on the snow
a classicist, he'll not allow
a corpse on boards was all he found,
a country house - and one who still
a crayfish rides on spider-back;
across each bush, across each steep,
across green meadows, dilly-dally,
across our snows of northern bleakness
across the Baltic in exchange
across the drift-encumbered acres,
across the fields, round hill and rock;
across the plain's enormous room,
across the public's toes; he steers
across the stage; he yawns: ''Ballet --
across the years to our own time.
across to her consort a weary
active, and hopeful, and insistent:
acute and subtle - in a word
addressed to Onegin''... ...'Well, that's easy.
addressed to Tanya, certain verses
add vale when he signed a letter;
a deathless murmur from within,
a deft arrangement to his hair,
a different mask? is he becoming
admires the tumult and the pressing,
a dog with horns, a goatee'd witch,
adore the love that comes in dream.
adorned the sanctum of our sage.
adorning all its country ways.
adorns Aunt Helen, the princess;
a dream's mute monument, reflection
a dumb moon, on a dumb horizon.''
advantages of heart and brain,
advises him of dinner-time.
a dwarf with tail, and a half-strain,
a far-flung traveller who was creaking
a fashion-plate for illustrators,
a faster, stronger pulsing start.
a few books had escaped disgrace:
affected pose - and an unspeaking
a fisher's fire. Through country gleaming
a flimsy bridge whose every quake
a flood on which no frosty band
a foe - our mood should be warm-hearted.
a fop, a punter on the cards,
a free romance's far horizon,
a frequent question: ''tell me who
a friend of yours in his first youth
After a fine career, his father
after her own room, makes her fret.
after Saint Chariton's gone past
after that, supper's served, and so
after the martyr's price it paid,
after two minutes, off again,
after your drive, it's quite back-breaking;
a full confession of the heart.
a furious, boiling, heaving main
again I see your soulful flight?
against each other swift, small feet.
against the tea's excessive sweetness,
aged Derzh&aacute;vin1 saw and blessed us
a general of majestic bearing
ages we'd never heard of love:
a girl or two, without a smile
a glossary of smart argot...
a grain of gladness; tears' repression
a grammar, a digest of fable,
a great attraction to conversing.
Agree, the way Eugene proceeded
a grey-haired, perfumed exquisite,
a grizzled Calmuck stands to meet them,
a group of monsters round a table,
a gulf has gaped... Says Tanya: ''I
Ah, all that my Onegin knew...
a haze in me, but I grew used
Ahead of them a pinewood slumbers
a hermit's life - he'd be proceeding
Ah, gently, gently, easy goes --
Ah, he had loved a love that never
a hidden beauty in the end:
a hideous deal of tribulation.
a house, a village, and a wood
''Ah, Tanya, come to me, it seems
a humble cross, in woodland gloom,
''A humble sinner, Dimitry Larin,
a hundred times afresh distorted;
a hybrid cross of cat and crane.
a joker in the old tradition,
a joking flirt, or both together,
''Akulka'' the onetime Selina,
a lady - what a grim discussion! --
a Lancer - how she deified him!
a Lancer wooed and won her hand,
alarmed by my melodious lay,
Alas, Eugene beyond all query
Alas for him! there was no keeping
Alas, it's not so hard to guess!
Alas, on pleasure's wild variety
Alas, our youth was what we made it,
Alas! the generations must,
(alas, too salted); now they're bringing
album and stays, Princess Alina,
a liar still, Lyub&oacute;v Petrovna,
a life-creating voice was lost;
all a pure maiden's love was breathing.
All are dumbfounded. Lensky shies
all blend into Eugene alone.
all brought to life at your direction.
all day, all night, his presence fills her,
all egoistical and dry,
All flourishing; they send their duty.
all for our tender dreamy maiden
all in a blaze, I said: it's he!
All in good time, on each point I
All Lensky's thoughts went hurly-burly,
all modish foes dread worldly shame.
all of an emptiness so killing - &gt;
all others with a waistcoat's set
allow no rest to you or me;
allows her hand, that's lost all feeling,
allows no comfort to come through --
all plunged his soul deep in the stream
all point at her, and all combine
''All right, I'll come then...'' ''What a friend!''
All right, you want the resurrection
all shout and argue, laugh and squeak.
All sleep: from the saloon a roaring
all sorts of hopeless appetites;
all stand. He walks towards the door.
all's well; the destined hour at last
all that today we find absurd.
all these are charming! but to put
all this, at eighteen years of age,
All this has now gone out of fashion,
all was material for transcribing:
All who behold him find him strange.
almanacs, journals of reflection,
almost as good as a dim lamp.
alone across the fields of space,
Alone amid all his possessions,
alone, and sunk in calculation,
alone with him; Onegin takes her
alone, with no adornment on;
Along the fronts of darkened houses,
along the Neva in a sleigh,
along the street lies dirty snow;
along the street where slumber drowses,
along Tverskaya Street already
Already borne down by regret,
already high in treason's league!
Already, in exultant fashion,
Already now the talk was thriving
Already Olga's hand was gripping
already she'd assume ill-luck.
already silvering all the plain...
already stirred him as they should.
already studying to intrigue,
already tends too much to smile
already there she stands beside him;
already yawned before the show,
although it's nearly heard the knell,
although one in no manner shares
although there are no streets, no cards,
always before the volume ended
always comes back: I'll not be wedded.
always contented with his life,
always monotonously gay,
Always our fervid hero tended
a lyre, and on it perched, a dove --
a madrigal for epitaph.
am always glad to write, it's true,
a mansion stands just round a turning.
A man who's active and incisive
a marksman crouching in the green.
a masculine disguise to aid
amateur of caprice and quirk.
amazement: ''Where's your second gone?''
ambassador?'' In some surprise
am doomed to perish, yet to die
Amidst the hills, down in that valley,
amidst the howling and the blast
amid the deadening joys of fashion,
am I estranged, does all that cheers,
a mild rebuke was his worst mark,
a modish second-hand edition,
a modish taste, a dowdy touch --
A moment earlier, inspiration
among my friends, in all that crowd
amongst devout coquettes, appalling
amongst the crafty and small-minded,
among the guests a general dinning:
among the guests she recognized
among the maidens and the wives,
among the neighbours round about.
a monster of the gens Satanic,
a Muscovite in Harold's dress,
amusing, flattering with the best,
an ace a dozen yards away;
an album's loose and floating sheaves.
a nation's wealth is, what augments it,
(an attribute that's quite vexatious,
ancestral1 portraits met the view
and act the humble or imperious,
and after jealousy's grim weather
And all grandmothers who are listening
and all into the salon squeeze,
and all is lost beyond retrieving;
and all our fresh imagination,
and all our modish education;
and all their ravishing invention
and all the neighbours planned a match
And all the while the moon was shining
and all the works of Fontanelle16 --
and all the world is buried deep.
and all this flashy masquerading,
and almost swoons, and almost dies.
and also prettier, I'll be bound,
and although Troy's greybeards, collected
and always the inspired regard --
and always the self-same objection;
and ananas, the gold of trees.
and an insouciant lorgnette.
and, any moment, down he'll slip.
and arm in arm they all go through;
and as in some appalling dream
and, as observer, to be present
and, as the years went by, who duly
and at the altar, with a crown,
and at the very self-same time
and autumn lingered, long and slow;
and band already tired of blowing,
and beat a nacreous wing when caught
and bedbug that infest the stages
and been as happy... as I could!
and bending deeply down to greet her
and blesses the unrivalled brand
and bliss for him is when he hotly
and blood had bubbled as it flowed;
and brains, and an attractive face.
and brandishes her tinsel splendour
and bred upon the Neva's brink,
and breeding ducks and geese as well,
and by Repentance. All this lends,
and by the sound of silly joys.
and captive girls, by Salgir20 lying.
and cared not what his daughter kept
and cattle roamed the plain, and here
and charming reverie's vain deflection
and cheers salute him. Tanya must
and clasps her neck; and now she sees
and coachmen swear, and women squeal.
and counsellor (retired) Fly&aacute;nov,
and country stillness: there the lyre
and crisply crunch the morning snow.
and, curious now about the lot,
and daily scenes of modish life
and dead ideas from that old hoard,
and dinner with a touch of idle
and doctors, he'd have died in bed.
and dreamt that she with him one day
and duck get up; with instant timing,
and Dunya works the samovar;
and dutifully shared his life
and ease his catch with all due care.
and eatables beyond all classing
and empty gossip, you'll allow,
and entered. Ballroom overflowing...
and entice a fellow in
and enviable for a poet,
And Eugene? half-awake, half-drowsing,
and even honourable man:
and evening now drew on in mist...
and every day its own enjoyment?
and every man won't understand it
And every minute his lorgnette
And every morning I awake
and every night shares her repose.
and every plea that lips can treat;
and everything around was dreaming,
and everything is cramped and loud;
and exclamations, and good cheer.
and faithful wife I'd have been cast.
and fastens, like a term of art,
and fatherland and grim confinement?
and feather-beds, and birds in cages,
and feel once more emotion's ban.
and felt himself love's invalide.
and festal evenings in the gloom.
and finally be turned to rock
and finds the world a darkling show?
and flown like arrows from a bow.
and Fly&aacute;nov, amply lubricated,
And foes he sees, long-since forgotten,
and for a chuckle or a smile.
and for belle Nina, as it read,
and force that purity inspires,
and for her cheeks to cease their blushing;
and found her dreams, her secret fire,
and frames would shudder, windows tremble;
and friend Evgeny. The princess
and friends and friendship, soul-destroying;
and from her eyes the eager tears
And from the nearby Army station
and from the salon the princess,
and from within come noise and cheer;
and gallops. Pistols made for pairing
and gave our heroine enjoyment
and give her comfort to the end:
and glad he was he'd thus arranged
and glittering whiteness all around.
and glumly serves the medicine bottle,
and good and bad are all mixed up. &gt;
and good and ill, and learning's fruit,
and good old sun more seldom glowing;
and Grandison beyond compare,
and granite, were so far apart.
and growing thicker; then, heart-shaking,
and, hands a-tremble, Nyanya prayed
and happy licence are allowed,
and has no knowledge of deceit?
and hate with malice; he whose life
and health, life's sweetness and its shimmer,
and heartless pleasure was up-graded;
and heart so tender, it can still
and he believed his friends were ready
and held him briefly in their sway,
and he pursuing, till at length
And he remembers, in the quiet
And here my sentiments impel me
''And here's the hearth,'' explains the crone,
and hetman of the gambling-halls,
and he was bored with social noise;
And he was loved... at least he never
and hid the bookshelf's dusty stack
and hills that delicately winter
and home he drives, deep-sunk in thought.
And home was now their destination;
and hope and passion; life had glowed
and how a country lives, and why
and how's Tatyana? Olga too,
And how they weigh! I know about
and human words, and horse's stamp!
and I be by the world forgot;
And if she happened anywhere
and I'll be thirty in a trice?
and I'll be true to him, for life.''
and in a corner make him choke
and in a singsong voice confide
and in flat calm I've found the stuff
and in full brilliance shines the ball.
and in her grief seemed fit to die;
and, in her hand, a small French book.
and in her unconsidered note
and in his look there shows somehow
and in it boldly I'm confiding''...
and in my soul, o spring, how madly
and in retreat from all enjoyment
and in the bath-house had a table
and in the country, blissful, horned,
and, in the district, this persona
and in the eyes of the judicious
And in their daughters' close embraces
and in the misted condensation
and in the morning wouldn't know
and in the role of virtuous mother
and, in the yard, stand eighteen jades.
and introduced, for the last lap,
and iron bridges will go arching
and I surrender to my fate.''
and it deceived us in return;
and it's the foreign phrase that trips
And Ivan Petushk&oacute;v; no, never.
and jam in jars, and household wares,
and jokes and spiteful gossip ran
and jolly magpies on the flit,
and junior Ensign in the Guards.
and just a double charge of shot
And just here, in the window-nook,
and kept quite silent while she read.
and kisses smack as young girls greet;
and leant upon the granite shelf;
and leave no faint footprint of glory...
and Lensky follows her... Eugene,
and Lensky, left eye closing, aimed --
and life celestial's phantom gleams,
and like an arrow from a bow
and listen for the heart's first sound,
and little dancing whirls of snow
and lives, a veritable sage,
and locked him in a dark recess.
and logic; yet the conversation
And long, as if through mists that spurted,
and looked at him without a word,
and looked for Lensky, while the labour
and look, my cousin's come, Buy&aacute;nov,
and look serenely on your beauty!...
and looks out on the darkened plain.
and lovelorn maiden whom he'd known,
and magic nights. In headlong course
and Malek Adel,4 de Linar,5
and manners of an earlier time.
and melancholy as Svetlana,2
and mileposts grip the idle sense
and more than once the German baker,
And my companion, so mysterious,
and my whole life has been directed
and nameless rivulet, that scene
and neighbours, followed the same ends.
and never played a shrewder trick.
and never stir a foot away!
and no one in the room so proudly
and no one's ear could take offence
and not a mention of my name...''
and not because she'd once preferred
And not because she'd read him, either,
and nothing in her look is altered:
and nothing pierced his senses' blur.
and not without a sigh, perforce
and now a swooning mind attends me,
and now at last he saw the World.
and now it's Bordeaux the Judicious
And now, monotonously dashing
And now, my friends, I hear from you
and now the crunchy snow is stripping
And now the door is opened wide,
And now there's gradually beginning
And now the two opponents doff
and obstinate his look. But she
and offer to that ash a sigh;
And of the cupboards, one contains
and once again received a crown.
and once forbidden fruit is seen,
and on her cheeks the fever stays,
and on her lips a light smile plays.
and only wish that my employment
and, on my bed-head gently leaning,
and, on the crosses, jackdaw hosts.
and on the crumpled sofa too
and on the flames let fall unseen
and on their captivating trail
and on their marks has made them stand;
and opened Schiller... but the embrace
and other, more exacting worries,
And our young poet - Olga fired him
and p&acirc;t&eacute;, Strasbourg's deathless glory,
and pale, and fade without a word!
and paler than the moon at dawn,
and Paris too. But hear my pleading:
and parted from her by their star.
and part in kindness? Just the same,
and parts the fringes of his curtain;
and pay my debt in the same coin
and plaits a piebald shoe of bast;
and pledged to you, and firmly planned:
and plunged in tender shame's confusion,
and portents of the lunar phase.
and prone to censure in our thought;
and put a cross-sign on the maid.
and put his glasses on to see
and put our heart into a shiver
and put them on a paced-out site.
and racking with their strain and stress
and radiate a rainbow: blazing
and ran far off... the Muse came too.
and raven curls of shoulder-length.
and read my Apuleius keenly,
and read the books there on her own.
and records of a heart in pain.
and redcurrants throw at him.
and rest his dear bones in the tomb,
and rest myself from earlier days.
and riches, and the wish to thank
and rightly so, but now his pain
and roused the village long ago:
and ruled him like an autocrat --
and sang me to the altar-mat.
and sat down by the window-sill.''
and satisfied with what he'd got,
and sat there as the minutes crept;
and saved from being charmed or fooled!
and says: ''Farewell, you vales and fountains!
and scorned his fellows through and through,
and, scroll in hand, before her eyes
and sees... whatever do you think?
and self-oblivion was his art!
and set off prompter than a whistle
and set on hating the coquette,
and sets her gently on the floor.
and she, submissively, inertly --
and should have played a different part:
and shout, and make room for the pair.
and shouts suggest a crowded wake;
and sideways her poor head is stooping.
and sighs, and asks oneself all through:
and silently he hung his head.
and sink to prose's humble level:
and skids and tumbles down; the cheerful
and sleeping sounder than a rock.
and slowly day begins to climb.
And so, at last, feature by feature,
and so, before the world of learning,
and so he lacks the strength to mention
and so in the salons could make
and so in winter-fields will shiver
And someone's heart will feel a quiver,
and some were even testifying
and soon his travels had begun,
and soon, oh soon the storm's arrears
and soon they bring her... a guitar
and soon will day's bright tune be played;
and so the harmless chat progresses
And so they lived, two ageing mortals,
and so your faithfullest supporter
and stately periwigs, their fame.
and still exempted from removal
and, still transparent to the view,
and still within, behind the veil
and stops his doleful heart from sleeping:
and stoves with tiles of various hue.
and strip the forest round about.
And suddenly her radiance lighted
and swaggers in a red calpack;
and swarming in his inmost soul.
and take due warning from my speech.
and taken by the French - some prize! --
and tea and supper; there's an inner
and teaching children how to spell.
and tears were drowning her regard.
and tea's brought in. Instead of chimes
and tedious means to festive ends.
and telling trochee from iambic
and tell of children's plighted playing
and than these letters, and these tears.
and that embittered mind which boils
and the blancmanger, then a fleet
and the churchyard where, new-erected,
and the deep-throated billows' choric
and the derivative Knyazhn&iacute;n:8
and theirs was the poetic flame
and the majestic, antlered royal,
and then a boat, with oars a-swinging,
and then a drozhky's clopping sound
and then a stroll in Letny Park.
and then concludes: she loves him yet!
and then, indoors the livelong day,
and then it's tea that comes to mention,
and then old cousin Pelag&eacute;ya
and then sat silent all the way.
And then she broods and mopes for good,
And then, to part us in full measure,
and then, with an enchanting grace,
and the poet, without a sound,
and there at large he goes patrolling
and there a tombstone says its word
and there, beneath your noonday sky,
and there, love's protestations, binding
and the Skot&iacute;nins, grizzled sages,
And the sly baseness, fit to throttle,
and the young city-bred newcomer,
and those we sing for will be paid
and though he liked a fiery quarrel --
and though my muse may be capricious,
and though perhaps old fires were thrusting
and thought, a sleepy numbness steals;
and though to do so would be daring,
and thoughts of her were what inspired him
and thus our race, so fluctuating,
and to it, with a grave import,
and took a mortgage on his land.
and took two Petriads in calf,
and to Tanya, when he was through,
and to that far and lonely nook
and to the vision of those mortal
and trails alone around the wood.''
and trains a mirror till it faces
and trembles like a hunted fawn.
and tried to write, but a hard session
and truffles, which have ever been
and underneath her downy pillow
and, under, ''toute &agrave; vous Annette'';
and up the rustling curtain crawls.
and useful goods of every kind.
and volume three of Marmontel.
and wakened Lensky by exclaiming:
and walk, and breathe, before I tell
and warmed the Chinese teapot; flowing
and washed its face, to her brought word
and wasted life's fine flower meanwhile.
and watched a different world unroll.
and watch him stubbornly bring low
and watch your daughters closer yet,
and Werther, martyred and doom-laden,
and what came out? a hairy, tumbled,
And what's more, they're so supercilious,
and ''what's your name?'' she asks him, speaking
and when, by misty moon, the east
and when its waters were not showing,
and, when one's least prepared for it
and where had he arrived from, not
and where he'd silently agreed.
and where is love's tempestuous yearning,
and where most surely notes are sped.
and where's her sister now? and where,
and where Terpsichore alone
and where Thalia, gently napping,
and where the husband, recognizing
and while the star still flew, she'd hurry
And while with all despatch he's dressing
and whiskers - all of this it keeps
and whisper ''Dunya, pay attention!''
and whist, that's now so keenly f&ecirc;ted --
and with a halting, trembling gait
and with a sigh I now admit
And with a smile the world caressed us:
and with a yawn took up his pen,
and with his dinner, and his wife.
and, with it, forced renown to come --
and with its feeble glow outlining
and, with my Eugene, so have I.
and with no post, no work, no wife,
and with the decorous throng to follow
and wore his dressing-gown to dine.
and wrecked the flooring-boards for good;
and yawn in silence at the stage
and yet a distant admonition
And yet, although it's past conveying,
and yet by Vergil or Racine
and yet in her you'd not detect --
and yet inseparably present,
and yet in vain ennui I squander
and yet so light. All that is real
And yet that goddess whom I'd never
and yet your honour is my gage
and your alas-ing and alack-ing
and your sincerity of thought
an elegy to her address,
an eloquence of fevered strength,
A new acquaintance claims our quill.
an idle monk in glum seclusion,
a nightingale, in forest gloom,
an inn at each stage of the route.
an ode in twenty-five cantos.
an offering ready for the ground.
an old man saw her as she came,
a note from Lensky; in between
another, a more chilling dream,
another, and his memory's fled
another bard1 in exaltation
another, freakish one, who stays
Another had the skill to ravish
''Another!... No, another never
another of the ball-dictators,
Another page of recollection:
another's grin was sly and shifty,
another's joy, another's breast,
a novel graced with such a name.
a novel in Lafontaine's8 manner...
a novel on the established line
a novel, vague and superficial,
anticipates a swim, in stead
An unknown yard, she sees from thence,
an urge to sleep; soon, clear as clear,
any Madonna by Van Dyck:
a park, enormous and neglected,
a parodistic raree-show?
apartment where a double glaze
a passer-by; and on tiptoe
a patriot, a cosmopolite,
A pause of silence and inaction,
a place for rest. Eugene alone
''A place where you'll find none of us.''
a plain, unceremonious troop,
a poet, and a Kantian sage.
a portrait with a charming touch;
appears offensive or amusing
Applause. Onegin enters - passes
approaches Olga; Lensky's signed
a pretty girl exactly like
a quilted chamber-robe and cap.
a raging torrent, capped with breakers,
a rambling walk beside my lake,
arch-commentator of the dream.
arch-rake, pothouse tribune-persona,
are almost bursting; she's quite ready,
are bound, by every virtuous wife,
are coloured in a single tone,
a red-foot goose, weight something fearful,
are entered here, in friendship's gage,
are here untouched by fashion's reign,
are just as nimble as their feet.
are old times, and the servants' hall.
a rest from toil and all its aches,
a restless urge for change of place
are treated to the fullest rigour
are we recalled to grief still burning
a riding whip. Tanya keeps walking...
a rogue, a slanderer, a poltroon,
a rooster head, and on the twitch
around her neck, or when for her
around Priam the much-respected,
arrested by the sheer perfection
Arrived apace, he gives the word
arrives, the girl's exhausted gaze,
a Russian family's old traditions;
a Russian hammer-blow, repairs
as all things did, to bore him; homing,
as at a censure that was hard.
a saucy kib&iacute;tka is slicing
as battles go, I've not begun;
as bonneted Academician
as by the shortest way they flew,
a scream rings out... the cabin's quaking...
as did the general at her side.
a secret truth, and at our cost
a seedling fallen in the earth.
As far removed as they were able
as fast as post-horses could go,
as fate's mysterious purpose burrows,
as files, and scissors straight and curving,
''As for the other one... tomorrow
as fresh as ever, for its graces
as from their luscious hive go tumbling
as gage of all things that were good,
as gay as morning and as clear,
a shadow, null and meaningless,
a shambling hoof along the way;
a sham that trustful souls work out;
a sharp-nailed paw towards her; bracing
as he descended to the grave.
as helpmeet in my sad existence,
as horses whirled him through the dust.
as if a cold hand squeezed her heart,
As if before some mournful parting
as if beneath her, dark and rumbling,
as if she'd been profoundly sleeping,
as if some goal had been achieved.
as if spellbound, Tatyana stands.
as I have... learn from my belief
(a simile of this and that)
a simple monument is built.
a simple Russian family night:
as infant sleep, or the unaffected
a single thing to her. His head
as instituted long ago.''
as in the nook he'd sit alone
as I recall a bygone age?
as it assembles them around;
(as I've so oft in jest related)?
asked Lensky: ''Should we start, I mean?''
a skeleton jerked by a cable,
ask Tanya out to dine, and they
A sledded coach, for years forsaken,
as linen's brought for him to wear.
a slipper, or a magazine?
as love's technique, when it would blare
As, lovingly, in his confession,
as much as in Moscow the proud.
as much of banquets and the cork
A sorry state of things, it's true!
a soul of sympathy and grace,
a soul so innocent, so trusting.
a soul that nothing can renew...
a soul that perished long ago,
as pair by pair the dancers fly.
a spirit strange, a spirit burning,
as sacred, lies before me still.
as Sadi17 sang in earlier ages,
as scarlet heels have lost their name
assembly, silent and dejected?
as smoke in azure sky disperses.
as something not to be declared,
As soon as he appears, discussion
''as sung of old, in years of glory,
a stall, a kitchen and a fence.
a stanza villainously padded.
a steed responsive to the bridle,
as the perfection of our days!
a story that still wants completing;
a stride on Petrarch's path, allayed
A sudden clatter!... blood was curdled...
a suite of elegies that, throbbing,
as was the old suspicious sage,
as well-read, though of pedant cast.
as when chill autumn rains surround us,
a swift, polite reply is written.
As with old friends, she craves diversion
as yours did, Homer, godlike lord,
as youthful sinning, or the strains
at a friend's word, a girl's caress.
at any hour escape his cell.''
at any other sort of book.
at any time he'd be prepared.
at Cleopatra, hiss her off,
a tear for him... but what's to weep?
at earliest morning out she started,
at eighteen years, to some compassion.
a tempting plume for you to take?
At feasts, though, full of pert aggression,
at feasts, was strong and fancy-free?
at fifty, would prolong the story
at first by Moscow's youthful graces
At first, disparity of heart
At first I thought it out of season
at first Madame gave him tuition,
At first Onegin's tongue produced
at first she had no heart to range;
At first they called; but on perceiving
at first, with God knows whom to see,
at forty he'd have got the gout,
at heart by grim remorse's freezing.
A thinker in a desert mission,
At home she'll equably receive him,
A thought was born, and quickly noted...
at hours, which, why I cannot think,
at last alone, and quite forgetting
At last he wakes, and stirs in bed,
at last the final hours arrive.
At last, with dawn upon him, stooping
at least by a regretful kindness;
at least her tone is sometimes found
At least I'll give him some advice:
At least you then showed for my years
at length, midst children swarming round him,
at my famed portrait and will say:
at noontime does his horn resound
a tomb, a Cyprian shrine's invented,
At once Anisia came to greet her,
at once they give a man the spleen.
a treasure never to be shared.
a true companion to the end,
a truly noble disposition;
at soldier-husbands, and the drum.
at some dull aunt's, sat down and knew
at such vivacious, free good sense.
at sunken wax inside a bowl:
attainable!... But now my lot
at the Academic Diction-book.
''At the Larins'!'' ''But how mysterious.
at the same moment in her ear:
at thirty, lucratively wed;
at this betrayal's fateful news?
At this midnight of my condition,
attract the sneering of the jealous,
at twenty, was a fop inbred,
at two-ball billiards prove his skill;
at verse, and hiss an imprecation,
audacious tunnels will be marching:
avert his chest from pistol's click,
a vivid brush, a witty rattle --
a vulgar touch. I can't translate.
awaits him - hears nobody coming.
away from trusting his own eyes.
Away inside that unassuming
away, so cool, so unconcerned?
a wondrous tenderness. And whether
a word or two, or stare unseeing,
a young girl's looking-glass is kept.
Bacchante-like, her flighty prancing;
Back to his regiment the Lancer,
Baratynsky
Bard13 of The Feasts, and heart's depression,
Bards of our tearful generation,
barrels, and then to drive aside
bassoons and flutes begin to trip.
bathed in the moon's inspiring light.
battling along that watery freeway,
bbc
bear, blackness, blizzard, bridge and crow,
bear's gone; a hallway, no mistake;
beauty with all its heavenly spell,
became like brother knit to brother.
became their scrutiny's concern.
because some glance of his has bitten
become a joke to us, its game,
becomes a horse for all to see;
be doomed to feel it: there's one goal
Beds are made up; the guests are all
beds, bridges, lawn, she never stops,
bed-time, and time for guests to go.
befitting such a noble pile:
before a cold, indifferent crowd,
before a fire too slowly flaming,
before first light they have appointment,
before him roast beef, red and gory,
before his eyes, imagination
before it was the golden play
before my gaze began to pass.
before Onegin there collected
before she goes, she seeks permission
before such candour of expression,
before such playfulness of soul!...
before the clavichord with knitted
before the fire a table's spread;
before their eyes they see unfold
before the window taking station,
before which life's horizon yet
before you on the ground, unhearing,
be good enough to go on reading:
begot by boredom out of greed.
begs your indulgence - it's been spun
behind deceit or double-dealing?)
behind her followed wildly dancing;
behind the door the clash of glasses
behind the mill. In solemn talk,
Believe (as conscience is my warrant),
believes in her elected dreaming
beloved friend, thou art my bride!''
below a hill; a garden stood
Below it, when sprang rains are swishing,
below the others who have signed
beneath, a brook rolls its tribute
beneath a shroud that's all dishevelled;
beneath bird-cherries and acacias
beneath it, vapour wreathed and coiled.
Beneath storm's vestment, on the seaway,
beneath the stone reposes here,
beside his heavier half is snoring.
beside the window-sill, that bed
beside unfinished lines, a suite
bespectacled, in tattered dress;
bestirred himself, was devilish active!
between their girls and this half-Russian.
Between the lines of text as printed,
Between them, every topic started
between two aunts, in pillared shelter,
bewitches Tanya... he is able
beyond a doubt, its wondrous tracing
beyond a string of dull tableaux,
beyond the grave we all must build --
Beyond the stream there smoked and stirred
bidding us to reject for good
bigot or prude? or has he quite
billiards are dropped, cue put to bed:
bitter-sweet glory's inspiration,
blessed are daytime's care and cark,
Blest he who in his youth was truly
Blest he who's left the hurly-burly
blest is the advent of the dark!
blest the poor lover who reads out
blest... though perhaps her fancy's caught
blinded to everything about
''Bliss was so near, so altogether
blooms when there's nothing else to do.
bludgeon the sense; it faints and whirls.
blue smoke of chimneys goes aloft,
blush to descry in looking-glasses
Bokharans, orchards, merchants, shacks,
Books, riding, walks, sleep heavy-laden,
boo Phaedra out as paralytic,
Bordeaux, you're like a faithful friend,
bored by success' giddy trifle,
boredom has just as sure an entry,
''Boredom, that's what so bad, my friend.''
bored with hilarity, and weary,
Boston and ombre for the old,
both dull and ludicrous, the bunded
both hearts to blaze had now expired;
both set him yawning just as much.
bottles to which some pitch is clinging:
boulevards, chemists, and Cossacks,
bound where the magic bow will send her,
boys, country women, stately halls,
boy-tribes with skates on loudly slice
breaking the lilac bushes, smashing
breakneck by moonlight at my side!
breaks a new passage with his sleigh;
bribe-taker, glutton and buffoon.
brigade of liveries in the hall,
bright Northern Cleopatra she:
bright summer days that passed so slowly,
bringing her unity and strength;
brings out its faro pack, and deals.
bring up a table, and a taper;
broke greetings off, and gave Eugene
brooding that is the lover's ploy.
brushes for teeth, brushes for nails.
brushes on thirty different scales;
Bubbles like Hippocrene are spraying;
bursts with cold envy and with bile?
burst to a fiery blaze in season?
but all concurred that, truth to speak,
But, as it is, this pied collection
but at the window, in the splendid
but brighter than the heavenly litter,
but by and large their talk's a hash
But come, thou youthful inspiration,
But, did they not corrupt society,
But dinner's served, so two by two
But don't be cross, my darling friend,
but Eugene hasn't moved; for certain
but Eugene's out from din and press:
But, even by accident, her passion
But ever stranger and more fearful:
But finally she heaved a yearning
but first, the dreams that hope can cherish
but for the effect that he created
But friendship, as between our heroes,
but from her shaggy-liveried ranger
but from our friends, good Lord protect us!
But from the hero of my tale,
But God, how deadly dull to sample
But go he won't: for him, a letter
but groomed an anecdote-collection
But he, by sad and rocky ways,
But he could draw a joking moral,
but held up by the simple fact
but here comes our loud-talking prancer
but here we must control our mouth.
But here, with our congratulation
But he's mistaken: Eugene's lying
but hold my tongue, lest it appears
But how she jumped, when in this hovel
''But, if you've kept some faint impression
but I, in love, was dull and dumb.
but I'm allergic to the North...1
''But I'm denied this: all for you
But I myself read my bedizened
But, in a fearful huff, his thrifty
but in an earlier age retarded,
but in his songs kept pride of place
but in it there are certain pages
But in misfortune or displeasure,
but, inside brackets, I'm contending
But in that desert his attainments
but in the old days she had heard
but in Zaretsky he induces
but I perhaps will be declining
but I refuse to chop or change.
but it's the first time you'll have known it,
But it's the talent for concealing
But it was passion that preempted
but I've become another's wife --
but I've not got the least intention
''But I was simply not intended
but I won't praise you - let me join
but just then Eugene's pistol flamed...
but just to make the bargain keener,
but ladies' hands are not for kissing;
But let's return to our essential,
but looks and talk took the direction,
but, lovely maiden, wilt thou not
but madrigals I've got to write!
but meanwhile let him live, and think
But my Eugene that night directed
but never asked her husband first.
but no, my Moscow never stumbled
But not today. Although I dearly
But now Aurora's crimson fingers
but now grown plain and kind in stead,
But now, in this vindictive pleasure
but now it bores me every minute.
But, now I've praised the queens of fashion,
but now I've rather lost the art.
but now my brain is darkened, Tanya:
But now - oh God! - the thought of you,
But now our roads are bad, the ages
but now, thank God, you're well and steady,
but now the mansion is forsaken;
But now the radiance of the moon
But now they're near. Already gleaming
But now Vladimir's doubts are still:
But now! what brings you to my feet?
but, nurse, you see... Oh, don't refuse...''
but Olga would have never read!
But onward, onward with my story!
But ours, whatever he might be,
but pantaloons, waistcoat, and frock,
but piteous he, the all-foreseeing,
but salt; near the princess a vein
but scarcely understood a word.
but she (for women, that's not new)
But she refuses to perceive him,
But she who modelled for the sketching
But soft! You hear? A scowling critic,
''But so it is: I'm in no state
but soon the ways we trod were parted
but spared no glance for Cicero;
but suddenly a snowdrift rumbled,
but Tanya found she couldn't cry:
''But tell me, which one was Tatyana?''
''But tell me who she is.'' ''My wife.''
But that's enough. At once, in stead,
But that's enough. My beauty's letter
but then a sudden breeze surprises,
But then, oblivious of the city,
but then she found their choice was strange.
''But there'll be such a rout and scrabble
but the salon's preoccupation
But the swift summer-time proceeds --
but the unbending goddess-daughter
But to the garden, to the scene
But was it happy, his employment,
But what about Eugene? With reason
But when a later age has found us,
but, when he'd rushed to Uncle's manor,
but when past joking he fell sick,
But when the hour of youthful passion
but when you've managed his despatch
but where are all your evenings spent?''
But where, mid tragic storms that rend her,
but where such hymns in my direction
But while she roams in thought, not caring
but whispers, the guffaw of fools...''
But who stands there, in this selected
but wildly still her heart is rushing,
but will, and reason's strong constraint,
but, without asking, they transported
But you, blest husbands, to the end
But you, grand tomes I loathe with passion,
but you'll undoubtedly agree
But you perhaps find no attraction
but you're not paying any heed.''
But you're not sociable, they say:
but your vile Helen's not my star --
but youthful, virgin hearts derive
Buy&aacute;nov, my vivacious cousin,
Buy&aacute;nov's heels have split the wood
Buy&aacute;nov tried - got flea in ear.
Buy&aacute;nov whirls off Pustyakova;
by all is sweetly mutilated,
by ancient limes, or by a brook;
by any itch for marriage ties;
by Baratynsky's3 wondrous pen,
by blazing fireplace, and intone
by calmly aiming at his pate
By chance those verses haven't vanished;
by clearing every sort of debt;
By contrast, in the frozen season,
by country freedom, rightful pardon
by decent company, has not,
by deep and shady woods protected;
by dint of cuff and kick and smack
By dire presentiment awestruck,
By dreams now sad in their conception,
by dreary snowdrifts piled around;
by drozhkies jaunting at full power
by dull eternity's purlieus,
By enemies, no less by friends
by fate's decree: this freakish stranger,
by flickering past us like a fence.
by fresh ennui as he reflected
by heaven with such an unsubdued
by judgement of the modern camp
by Lensky in his Olga's book;
by magic everything instils her
by mist of tears, without replying
by moonlight two young girls took pleasure,
by my Eugene, not for his heart,
by Naiads, one foot on the ground,
by nature, contradiction's friend.
by nervous hands of a schoolmaid:
by Neva, on a summer night,
by now he's driving home to dress.
by now his bride-to-be has wed
By now the rays of spring are chasing
By now the shades of night are flying,
By now the sledge is at the portal --
By now the sun is climbing steeply,
By now whist's heroes have completed
by pain and languishment; she craved
Byron
by Scott, by Seneca, or Byron,
by sighs of passion or by praise.
by six-page letters, rings and tears,
by sluggish Lethe may be swallowed,
by some perverse schoolboy for sport;
by the cold world's corrupt finesse;
by the new whisper in the wood?
by two small oaktrees in a ride.
''By virtue of procrastinating
by waters that were still and clear,
by way of secret tome that slept
by way of toast to their fair neighbour;
by what's called machinal reaction,
by will of Zeus, the high and just,
by writers of her admiration,
calls out his name... All unavailing:
calm men with beatific features,
came distant horns, and gallant singing.
came driving to his country seat,
came out so soft, it scarce was heard.
can chatter, and be silent too,
can disavow that. I have read
''Can it be she?'' Eugene in wonder
can it be true, and firmly stated
Can it be true, it won't come twice --
can it be true, their crown at last
can it be true you must await
can lean on faith, who can dismiss
can read enough to get my fill.
Can she have found the enigma's setting?
can't really be: for we've outgrown
can yet keep nail-care much in mind:
Capricious belles of grand Society!
caressing breath has fanned my face
caricatured them in his mind.
cartoonist-pencils of Saint-Priest;11
ccb
Chairs are pushed outward, loudly rumbling,
champion of rights, as in the wrong.
Chapter Eight
Chapter Five
Chapter Four
Chapter One
Chapter Seven
Chapter Six
Chapter Three
Chapter Two
cheek upon hand she softly cries
cherries then we'll throw at him,
cherries throw and raspberries
Childe-Harold-like, Eugene's devoting
choked up. There's no wreath on the bough;
choruses, Tanya can but wait,
Christmas came on. What joy, what gladness!
claiming Tatyana'd found her man;
Clarissa, Julie, or Delphine6 --
clears in a flash the freezing room;
clock in the country rings the hour;
close as a shadow on the ground;
closely embraced, in wending here,
coated with a thin layer of spite.
coldness of wit; each note he took,
cold, pure as ice, and as unkind,
cold reason, sleep in sensual welter
come in and warm yourself a minute!''
comes clearer through the mists of dawning.
comes for awakening, comes for slumber;
come to disturb me and affright.
''Come to me in my golden halls.''
come to the fields, my friends! To horse!
come, trouble my imagination,
''Command me, darling, as you choose.''
commands our rhymester-brotherhood:
compact of amorous trash, and worse,
Compassion, yes, and indignation,
complete with broad-brimmed bolivar,
Compliment and congratulation;
comrades despised, and comrades rotten;
conclude that it's high time she wed!...
condemned the millstones as a sham.
condemned to a lifetime of hard,
condemns the monde and its excitement;
Conjecture found unending matter:
consequences of hideous woe;
conversing in a singsong voice;
converting morning to midnight,
convinced at heart that my most zealous
cooked-up where garret-vermin babble,
coquettishness has got no trace --
could have been turned to worthier ends --
could I accept for just a minute
''Could I be happy circumscribing
''Could I just see the house, I wonder?''
could it be she... or had he dreamed?
could it be she, who just had turned
Could it not be that by convention
could not conceive how solemn Grimm13
could see no harm in books; himself
could they not give each other quarter
could they not laugh out loud, before
council, and with profound head-shaking
covered her face. When all came out
covered the golden coal - the steam
cows low, in the still nights of spring
craving your tolerance in season --
(critical judges, strict as any)
critics and their capricious vogues,
crossed to the window, read it through.
culture, so far from healing, hurts us;
custom is despot of mankind.
custom's bestowed us from on high.
damns the intruders; Tanya lies
dared clean his nails in front of him,
daren't look behind her; fairly dashing --
darkly above the water's lilt,
darlings, then we'll run away,
darts to the boy, and looks, and still
Dawn comes in mist and chill; no longer
Day faded; on the table, glowing,
days that are lost behind the curtain,
Days when I came to flower serenely
daytimes and evenings passed alone?
dda
dead ash sets no more sparks a-flying;
Deaf to her sister's intervention,
deaf to the voice of your despair?
dean of Chaldea's learned team,
dear companions, darling friends,
dear ladies' feet fly past like hail,
dear Tanya, lover of illusion;
Dear Tanya, you're condemned to perish;
death on his brow, your friend should lie,
debauchery was praised, and studied
deceived, was overjoyed to rest.
declares itself in ways unwitting --
Decreed in highest court for ever...
Deep down, an epigram is stirring
deep in distraction, his own rook.
deep in Moldavia the abhorred,
defeated, turned up at his neighbour's.
delicious novels, laps them up;
demanded. ''Yes, she looks... And yet...
demanding: when will he reply?
Departure date's long overtaken;
Deserving object: there can be
desires and dreams and griefs were breeding
despite herself, is Lensky's doom;
despite herself, rehearsed the part:
devoted to the Muse, or learning,
devote to whist an evening party,
devoured a book with rapt attention,
devouring Gibbon and Rousseau,
Diana's breast, the cheeks of Flora,
did any glasses seek her face,
dip in their jugs; where shadows quiver
direct from shipboard into ball.
ditties of our secret world,
ditty of our secret world,
ditty portends a loss; more dear
diversely urging the same plea,
Dmitriev
does he still pose, and play the freak?
do fields echo with work and shout;
dogged by one feeling, only one --
Dogs, howling, rushed in her direction...
Don Juan's and the Giaour's creator,
dons of Epicurean rule,
don't judge the race before it's run --
Don't let a ghost be your bear-leader,
don't let me stray in paths unplanned.''
don't waste your efforts on the air.
doubted of it, so lived in bliss.
doubts, to exhaust the heart, then fire
dowagers smiled as she went by;
do with her when a flat reply
down from his Kalmuck steed he rolled
down from the porch, light as the lightest,
down in our damp earth-mother's womb!''
down slopes of mountains, when a blaze
Down there, by slow degrees, the stream
down to the garden, and her eyes
down to the plain in turbid rills.
drank in your words when all was still --
drawn from a dim, warm-hearted past,
dreams of inconsequential cast,
dreamt of reproving what they'd done:
Dressed like - --,14 duly dreading
dressed up a desperate egoism
drew scrutiny no less complete --
drink in the midnight benediction,
drive on! And now we see a-shimmer
Drive on, Andryushka! quicker, quicker!
drives home - and plunging deeper in,
drive there, and with formality
drunk, eaten, yawned, grown weak and stout,
due punishment was handed down
dumb I must perish, and alone.
each coldly plans the other's slaughter...
Each day, despite the appeals of reason,
each grips his pistol in his hand.
each in tumultuous turn descending
each moral puts us in a doze,
each news of her he'd been imbibing --
each object held a secret message
each of us has his favourite lobby:
Each one by now is badly needing
Each others' and their own successes,
each springtime, on the growing tree,
each took four steps across the space,
early tomorrow at the mill
earnestly striving for persuasion
earn for me the rewards of fame --
earn us the favour of the Court?
earth's rim grows light, and a forewarning
eight rubbers; and by now eight times
Elated by the music's blaring,
Elbow on table, spirit seething,
Elle &eacute;tait fille, elle &eacute;tait amoureuse.
else, having found his pleasure cloying,
embodied by the power of dreaming,
emboldened by his Olga's smile,
emotion, thought, and magic sound;
empire, and fled it; happier still
empty the purpose it proclaims,
Enchanted land! There like a lampion
encore Mo&euml;na,7 - and rejoice
ended his wild career of fashion
endorsed by fashionable rabble,
engaged then - but against her will;
enormous bear; Tatyana yelled,
Enough, I tell you, that will do --
Enough I've wandered in the suite
Enough, my friends; it's all so-so.
enough of my loquacious lyre:
''Enough, stand up. It's now for me
Enough. The load is off my shoulder!
enquired the lady of the hall:
ensconced beside the window-pane.
entered his sentence in the books.
enticing nets to do them harm.
epoch's portrayed, survived the ban,
Escaped from social rhyme and reason,
e sempre bene, gentlemen.
etcetera. But her trepidation
Eugene as clever, and quite sweet.
Eugene, at Olga's side, was racked
Eugene attends the boulevard,
Eugene forsakes the packed reception,
Eugene had no wish to betray
Eugene has caught up, quick as quick,
Eugene's a pedant in his dress,
Eugene's response was automatic;
Eugene takes Olga, and is gone;
Eugene turned countryman. He tasted
Eugene was free, and as a dresser
Eugene, with solemn face, paid heed,
Eugene would willingly have started
Europe's most finely chiselled wares
Even at home his occupation
even by Ladies' Fashion Post,
even if he drops or pines away.
Evening, and darkening sky, and waters
even in joke the heart won't shiver.
even in novels, vice entraps us,
even in our names (and how much worse
even the scandal's not amusing;
even to count them throws me out.''
even without me it will sink;
ever so roughly rocked my soul!
everything's dim and unenthusing;
Evgeny! ''Ah!'' Tatyana, fleeting
Evgeny echoed him: ''My second?
Evgeny, full of inward laughter,
Evgeny, hating litigation,
Evgeny looks at Lensky, chilled
Evgeny loved him from his heart,
Evgeny quietly began
Evgeny read the sad epistle
Evgeny stood, with soul regretful,
Evgeny's total store of knowledge
Evgeny thought in just this fashion.
Evgeny waits: and here comes driving,
Evgeny, whom the repercussion
evoke emotion's pitter-patter,
evoke for you a sombre bliss;
excited not a hint of passion:
exercised, under lucre's banner,
exhausted and done up, I take
Exhausted by the ballroom's clamour,
exists for me one special pair!
expecting winter, nature waited --
explodes; wine fizzes up... but stay:
expose his soul to an intrusion
eyes rolling, arms uplifted, furious,
Faces before him flash and change
faceted muzzles by the rammer;
facing a belle I loved with passion,
fades from the view, and in the hush
fail to perceive - that's by the way).
fancies, my rhythmic search for truth,
fancies once more are hotly bubbling,
fancy, a wine serene in mood,
far-distant heaven's vaulted room;
Fare thee well, and if for ever,
Farewell, familiar woods! Farewell,
Farewell, Petrovsky Castle, glimmer
Farewell the games of golden childhood!
Farewell to you, my free existence!
''Farewell, you realms that own the sway
farewell you too, familiar mountains!
far, far from Italy, his adored.
far from it! just one more collapse.''
far more than most who leave this life.
fate could be something else again..,
Fate saved Evgeny from perdition:
fat P&uacute;styakov has driven in;
Faublas'3 disciple for an age --
feeling is quaint, and fit for fools.
feelings he valued - from outside.
feeling to what had long been heartless:
felicitously every theme,
fever of rhyme: thereby he's doubled
fieldward, in noisy swarm, the bees.
field-work, and walks with inspiration,
fieldwork directed from the path,
filled him with thoughts that swarmed and whirred;
finding in that no deprivation --
find, in the trivial, serious matter;
finds her alone, and there they sit
Fired by the god of inspiration,
fire of the cutlets' scalding fat,
fir, forest, hedgehog, raven, snow
first flakes of snow whirl round and sink
first snow for shoulders, breast and head:
first, we'll take vanity, and let
fits us as if it were our own?
five hundred years) for sure our byways
Five versts or so from Krasnog&oacute;rie,
fixing an early rendezvous
flicker of swiftly twirling pairs,
flits Olga: ''now, tell me straight out,
flown from society as we know it,
flown like an arrow, then he's given
flows and reverberates. Reciting,
fly to my corner like a dart,
foes, friends and loves, their voice is stilled.
Foes! Is it long since from each other
folly for me to interfere
Fonvizin8 sparkled, freedom's champion,
for aeons. Maybe it was fated
for angry heirs, as one, to fall
For cousins from afar, on meeting
for dance, and din, and worldly ways,
for dreams, or journalistic battle,
forehead, he strummed, his vision flitted
forests where my young age was passed
foretells for her some wondrous role;
for friends of languor, or of fun,
for God's sake, that will do. But, brother,
For goodness' sake, you can't be serious
forgot. Its trodden path is now
forgotten features. ''Can you say,
forgot to think of town and friends
for grumbling, gossiping and swearing
for happiness, I sought, and ranged
for happiness - that alien role.
for heart's delight, or fun, you took,
for her improvement, a roman,
for her instruction, and her breast
for her, no joy from winter-time,
for him all sham has found rejection,
for him a lofty stair. His shade,
for him, at night, before the indulgence
for him, the objective on life's chart
for 1808: his obligations
for his old courses to be changed.
for honour, a straightforward pride.
for hours alone; she walked and walked...
for hours, with elbows on the table --
for in our time, beyond dubiety,
For it was custom that consoled her
for jokes, and rows, and merry dreams!
for long... for evermore. We've chased
for maybe fortune will have saved
for men to see, still in the scope
for me to glimpse this Phyllis ever
for, mistress-like, it's brilliant, vain,
for nature's unadorned reaction
for Olga, on the spreading lawn,
for Olga's beauty, Lensky gives
for planting cabbage, like Horatius,
for quite a while by fortune's hand.
for raking up historic dust
Forsake, indulgent reader - driven
for Satan, love's a splendid joke.
For several days she peaked and pined
for shame and fear my wits are sliding...
for she was bored by laughs and noise
For such am I. When you were speaking
for swapping bullets with my mate.
for Tanya, winter's ways are dread.
for tempests and for feasts and noise;
for the bleak tongue of boorish clods --
for the first time the Muse came near.
for the footlights, this fickle traitor
for them by fathers who, as friends
for them, in Butterweek5 the greaseful,
''For then, Onegin, I was younger,
for the sublime, and for the passions
for the two ladies at the gates.
for the young pilgrim. So at last
fortunate one, he'd not disgrace;
fortune, and dignity, and glory,
forty years long would criticise
for unmeant kindness - how he shone!
for us are instruments and tools;
for vanity, and din, and glare!...
forward or back? it's true that he
For what charade is he apparelled?
for what's been given us to take;
(for which he must receive due praise).
for which of them the tomb was yawning,
for whom her passion has been planned
for whom, to expiate your crimes,
for witty; in his Gallic way
for wood and tallow; all the range
for you have, at this early date,
for you, I think, the humble dimness
for your enlightenment to say
found for its utterance that night.
found that in laughter yawns could stifle:
four fateful stairs. Then, without slowing
fragments of poems from the North,
fraught with enticement and disaster?
Freed from its dripping cork, the bottle
freedom and peace, in substitution
freedom's enthusiastic dream,
freezes my blood... Yet all the same,
frenzy which wrecks our lives for sound,
fresh as a poppy-flower, your face.''
fresh from the cot, an infant pickle,
fresh leaves... for such is heaven's mandate.
Friend of my heart, be at my side,
Friends, all this meant was: I've a date
friends, foes, priests, guests, inured attendants
Friendship, as I must own to you,
Friends, how my heart would leap with pleasure
Friends of my Ruslan and Lyudmila,
friends, recollect how I surrendered
frightened to death a timid love,
frightening with all despair's disguises,
From all sweet things that gave me pleasure,
from all the world, they sat and pored
from any gentlemanly distance;
from ball to bed behold him come;
from Boston's cloth or gossip's quote;
from cruel fortune such a fate?
from daybreak valleys lift the sun;
from day to day she could but wait;
from deepest backwood, furthest under...''
from dish of water, rings are shifted
from drowning's death in Lethe river
from early morning on he will
From early on she loved romances,
from gaol to greenwood, by such fiction
from German realms of mist and steam,
From here, deep-sunk in pensive woe,
from her Monsieur took on the child.
from her my lips will learn and mark
from her they strive to coax and coddle
From his first youth he'd known the force,
From hour to hour a surer capture
from Million Street16 came floating round;
from off her charming shoulder's drooping,
from table, clattering on the floor;
From that rough spell at last exempted,
from the agent, with this tale to tell:
from the first moment it was heard
from their own country? Then she shot
from thirty down to two; and stop,
from threads both sad and humoristic,
From violent passions fast pulsating
from waxen cell the bees again
from whom he'd kept a letter, where
From widow Clicquot and from Mo&euml;t,
from young Tatyana's dwelling-place,
frontwise and back, that way and this.
frost gleams. We watch with gleeful thanks
frozen in his tight-fitting suit;
fruit liqueurs and an Almanack
fruits of my labour and my ink...
full of his usual pith and wit,
Full of obedience and demureness,
galop, mazurka, waltz... Meanwhile
garden, a modest home, the place
gave up the ancient Kremlin-keys:
gay nature and its sparkling distance!
gazes at all the scene around;
gazes at him... and nonetheless,
gentlemanly, quite precise,
get two young friends to pick a fight,
''Get up: it's gone six! I'll be bound,
''Get up, my child, it's time, get up!
ghostlike, must trouble him who feels --
giddy as Venus when she's mounting
girl reapers as the streamlet flows
girls' albums, signed in blood for choice;
girls as they passed her spoke less loudly,
girls often change to their contentment
girls' tears, their swooning, for Eugene
give for a bookshelf, a neglected
Give me a pen and give me paper,
give me the homely hearth, and lend...''
gives way to nature's normal passion:
Giving his pistol-butt a squeezing,
giving the lady their protection,
''Gladly.'' ''So when?'' ''Why not tonight?
glitter and tumble as they go,
glitters beneath its icing-sliver;
glitters with hoar-frost all about.
Godfearing folk will institute
God grant that from this little book
God grant them years and years of health!
God grant you took at least a grain.
God's thunder burn you up! And when
goes out into the courtyard spaces
goes out of us when youth is dead.
''Go, nurse, and leave me here apart.
Goodbye, for now we make an end.
''Goodbye, Onegin, time I went.''
goodbye to you, my true ideal,
good-looking, in the flower of age,
good night; I swear I'll lie down soon.''
go off to sleep quite hale and hearty,
gossip, and tricks, and the patrolling
graduates of the Levshin1 school,
Grandison, cousin, d'you remember?''
great bard despite his modest trapping,
grew hardened to life's frosty clime;
grey Filatevna, to present her
grey-haired and weak, beneath it only
Griboedov
gripped him no more; soon they were raising
grow cold, and hard, and stiff as stock,
grows, surges, boils, for lack of room
... &gt;2
guests bow, feet scrape, and children squall.
Guillot, behind a stump in view,
Gvozd&iacute;n, Buy&aacute;nov, Petushk&oacute;v
Gvozd&iacute;n, exemplary farmer,
had been for ever borne off far
had been imposed by winter's hand;
had chased me to the world above.''
had come to him in field and glade;
had drawn Eugene's especial heed
had filled this heart, and detestation
had fortune blest me by prescribing
had gone in no uncertain fashion
had killed his best friend in a duel;
had left the squire no time to look
had long been wasting and enslaved
had long proved tedious to distraction:
had made his name, when, bold as bold,
had nothing to employ his life.
had once before, across the scene
had only debts on which to live.
had ruled out reading, in their place
had with its brilliant mantle crowned --
had won her loyalty! What soul
haphazard; so, to God be thanks,
Happy a hundredfold, whoever
Happy is he who's known its fretful
harboured by maidens of thirteen!
has come with Kharlikov; he passes
has driven off, to find his own.
has felt time's desiccating blast?
has fixed; but for my heart to beat
has fixed on her a steady gaze.
has found an end before his time.
has found a port for his old age,
has gone to Olga, swept the girl
has hardly mastered postal prose.
has kept him warm in chimney's blaze
has lately wintered, just a space
has left, and no one here has met her...
has made the park her brooding-place,
has never staked his family seat.
has opened up his serving-trap.
has painted for us the first snow
has something low and unrefined.
has taken on a silvery gleam;
has voices that are more resounding,
has wished it an abrupt goodbye --
hate, love, joy, sorrow - every feeling,
have been a fool; yet he'd a right,
have clearly got the upper hand
have drenched the steel bit as they go
have each asked him to a soir&eacute;e:
have gnawed our bridges, and the flea
have other maidens, since you vanished,
have pushed their frontiers further out,
have reunited friend to friend!
have snorted, reared, and whitely foaming
have vanished, like an empty noise,
have you read lines of your creation
have your fill of revelry!
having by her severe demeanour
having decyphered on their brow
he almost begs for absolution,
he almost lost his mind, expired,
he and Onegin start alluding
hear my confession as I stand
hear, once more filled with inspiration,
he arrives - the cork goes flying up,
heartfelt, imploring, touching trash
He asks. She can't accept. Why ever?
heaven's will - for you I'm set apart;
he carries her inside the door
he changed the corv&eacute;e of tradition
he charged three roubles and a half,
he consecrated to my keeping?...
He could have spoken without harming,
He cursed Theocritus and Homer,
he danced attendance with the best;
''he dandled me as a small boy.
He'd brought back all the fruits of learning
he'd drink his coffee, flutter through
He deemed, in general, letters vain,
He destined Olga's hand for me,
He'd given up girls - now gave up letters,
he'd got annoyed, the tricky devil.
he'd listen to the administrator;
he doesn't hear when I address
he dozed away; but when the real
he'd pop the poison in his chalice!
He drained his glass down to the end
he drinks - all shout and take a swill;
he drives in brilliant sun; striated
he drives there like a bird in flight,
he drives up in and out of season
he'd sack the Muses and get wedded;
he'd see his soul cool in its grate;
he'd swim this Hellespont; then later
heeding the press, will make us look
Heedless of the proud world's enjoyment,
he ended even your employment;
he even dares, once in a while,
he eyes the door, looks slyly through.
he failed to join that sharp profession
he fed on hope's deceptive dinner;
he fell in love with darkest wildwood,
He finds the shock beyond all bearing:
he fled from their resounding chatter!
He followed them without illusion,
he found all kinds of brickbat hurled.
he found Tatyana so attractive,
He found them in some old collection,
he found too much that he regretted:
He gave his arm. In sad abstraction,
He gave this figure - loved with passion,
He gave three balls a year, and rather
he gazed out on the threatening glow.
he goes ahead and parts the motley
He goes inside, corpse-like of feature...
He got so used to this immersion,
he had conveyed some moral teaching,
he had the talent of saluting
he has to bring the battle-case.
he heard in stillness and in din
he hears a voice; ''well, what? he's killed!''
he informed this envoy diplomatic
he killed eight years in such a style,
he knew too well that sort of scene.
He lacked the slightest predilection
he laughs - they all begin to chuckle;
He lay quite still, and strange as dreaming
held in constraint by pity's touch:
he leaves a tender verse behind,
he leaves one morning the hermetic
he leaves the house, calls for his horse
he'll charm you with his fine invention,
he'll spend before the looking-glass,
hell's terrifying imprecation:
he'll take you prisoner, you'll admire
He looks, and answers: ''Agafon.''4
he looks, and sees the hour of day --
he looks, in sweet irresolution,
he loves you... like your kith and kin!
helping the poor, or while I mended
He mounts the sledge, with daylight fading:
he murmurs: ''Olga's mine for saving;
henceforth in front of you I weep,
he never took one from the shelf,
He nods - they start to fuss and truckle;
He opens up a door. What's that
her bosom heaves, her cheeks are staring
her bow, as calm and as restrained.
her clever husband on the morrow
her darling foot of its wet shoe,
Herder, and even at times a Russian --
her discomposure, her confusion,
her drops of tears, and seated there,
he reached the stream below the hill;
he read, and read - no satisfaction:
he read of course the sceptic Bayle15
He reads to Olga on occasion,
he really forced one to admire him --
here a weak version, incomplete,
Here comes the yard-boy, who has chosen
hereditary foes they seem,
Here, in his red peruke and glasses,
Here insolent prize-dandies wither
''Here in the winter he'd have dinner
''Here, near Saint Simeon; in December,
here's boredom, madness or pretence,
here, seize it quick for this quatrain!)
here's Petushk&oacute;v, the local fop;
Here stands, with shady park surrounded,
here's tea that Olga's been preparing;
Here's tea: the girls have just, as bidden,
he rested - wept for by his neighbours,
here there's no conscience, here no sense;
Here with his wife, that bulging charmer,
Her eyes along the margin flitting
her eyes are lowered, but ablaze,
Her eyes were opened, and she said
her face would pale, she'd start to quiver.
Her father, kindly, well-regarded,
Her feelings in their weary session
her feelings were far more inclined --
her fingers shake, she doesn't dare
Her frightened cry brought running out
her full account of voiceless pain?
her girlhood games; in them he'd shared,
her golden earrings off and whipping;
her grief, and nearly ran away.
her handkerchief has fallen too;
her hands affectionately pressed;
her head in modesty cast down,
her heartache, did it long compel her,
her heart had long been overrun:
her heart had spoken, free as air,
her heart speaks to her even louder
Her husband enters, thus concluding
her husband's or the world's attention...
He rings at once, and what a scurry!
her journey home is overdue.
her kindness, move Tatyana; yet
her little friends, Tatyana'd yawn,
her look, so sweetly sorrow-laden,
her love obeys the laws of feeling,
Her loving spouse with approbation
her manner is no less contained;
her nerves, she leant on it her weight,
He roamed the world, his lyre behind him;
her out-of-fashion clothes!... oh, mercies!
her out-of-fashion turns of phrase,
Her passion burns with stronger powder
her path a hare in headlong flight
her progress at the masquerade.
her Russian was as thin as vapour,
her sacred store of bliss and weeping
her seal with its engraven crest.
her secret work of magic suasion!
herself not knowing how or why)
her soul's attention; just behind her
her soul was waiting... for someone.
her steppeland charms into a rout.3
Her tender touch had never fingered
her thoughts away, knew how to lavish
her to the altar and the crown.
her way; she passed, then as she walked
her worth (but anathematising
her youth with all his repertoire
he's a freemason too; for him,
He's always with her: either seated
He sang of grief and parting-time,
he sang of lifetime's yellowed page --
He sang of love, to love subjected,
he's at the club, a real stayer,
he saw no point in staying on,
he saw that, as in cities, here
He saw the sad girl's trembling state,
he's bowed politely; his attention
he's called you out - say, in your soul
he scowls - and the whole gang are still;
he's dreadfully dissatisfied;
He sees: in slush, stretched out and keeping
he sends a letter, penned with passion.
he sends, a second, then a third.
he's first to toast her in the bowl,
He's flown to Talon's,4 calculating
he's gnawed by serpent Recollection,
He's gone away and left his village,
he's got consumption. In his anguish
he's happy, yes, he's almost well...
He's here - Monsieur Guillot, my friend.
he's host, that's obvious. Thus enlightened
he should have settled for disarming
he sleeps, away from glare and glamour,
he's left sad footprints on the ground.
he's lost his self-command, and crazed
He smiled as Lensky talked: the heady
he's moved... you see him from the side.''
He's neither died, nor lost his reason,
He's off - this ruthless legislator
he sounds, in lyric frenzy sunk,
he's put belle Tatiana instead.
he's racing millward like a bird.
he's seen it all; with looks and fashion
he stalked the drawing-rooms, remote
he steers her, nonchalantly gliding,
he stood there, pensive and forgetful,
he stoops and, tenderly confiding,
he strove to achieve the appropriation
he struggled to bite back the chilling
he's up the steps, with heart a-quiver
he's viewed the boxes without passion,
He sweetened up with fancy's icing
he takes her to a chair, beginning
He thought that Olga'd be confused,
he trembles, knows not what to tell;
he turns away: ''I've had enough --
he wakes; a bath where ice is floating;
He wakes - and who is this who writes him?
he warns his man for duty, stressing
He was a good and simple barin;6
he was a menace, and a freak.
he was a poet in his day.
He was convinced, a kindred creature
He was no fool; appreciated
He was sweet-natured, and yet wild.
He was the slave of a tenacious,
He was too young to have been blighted
He was without that dithyrambic
he watched the guests and, as he dined,
he whirls her through the wood... a hovel
he who has cooled down love with parting,
He who has lived and thought is certain
he would have found a normal fate.
High ceilings everywhere abounded;
High rank, of course, and fashion's glasses,
high time he should be on his way.
him far enough through wild and waste.
him prove it, writing after me.''
himself just like a simple chap.
his acts and words to suit our end?
his awkwardness, he's hardly said
his beasts outdoors at dawn, nor ringing
his beefsteak with champagne, or drown
his bow was wholly unaffected.
his children and his faithful wife,
his choice could shock or might offend;
his collar in its beaver braiding
his conscience's record, and so
his converse gave Onegin pleasure;
his destiny) without a smile
his dreams, while she whom they're about,
his dull, sick look, his dumb reproach --
his elegies flow like a brook.
his epigrams topped up with bile.
His father died; and (as expected)
His father failed to understand
his foolish face; more pleasant yet
his freedom, in his youth's first flower,
his French valet, Guillot, is there
his gaze at Tatyana alone --
His hair was fashionably curled,
his head upon her shoulder... blaze
his heart was plunged! A sudden sound,
his hours to dreaming them away:
his housekeeper and her department
his humbly suppliant approach,
his illness lends him courage and
his itching verse, Monsieur Triquet
his life till dawn's already making,
His life went sailing in calm weather;
his lyre, now stilled, in its high mission
his mind, in judgement still unsteady,
his mind's eye focused on the hinted
his mind, so cold and so precise.
his mother taps the window-pane.
his nag has smelt the snow, and planted
his nature would be changed and steadied,
his neighbour entered at a rush
his news has set the party humming!
his parents' patriarchal dust
his pistols, laid them in their case,
his pup to grace the sledge, while he
his serfs rejoicing at their lot.
his sobs, where his live tears were flowing;
his song was limpid in its tune
his soul still blossomed out, and lighted
his soul to a delicious rapture
his soul with murmurs of distress.
his spindly, shaggy nag. As fitting,
his strangeness, wholly unaffected,
his Strasbourg pie, or point a moral,
his style breathed love, and not the gibing
his Sunday game of cards with me.
his sweetheart faithful to her grief.
his tale of youthful love, narrated
his tea with rum quite left behind,
his thoughts were on a distant goal:
his thrusting horns, and as he passes
his transports, and the marriage-bed
His unexpected apparition,
his virulence that made you smile,
His visitor from the beginning
his weary head, and softly drooping
His wife, just like Tatyana, had
his wit, according to the rules
his young heyday's supreme employment,
Hm, hm. Distinguished reader, tell me
hoar-frost and sun in freezing weather,
Hoar-frost that crackles with a will is
hold half the world still unreleased,
homestead, before her parents' gaze,
honest devotion to the good,
hope sting it, then we'll try deploying
hope that he's had no time to fashion
Horace
Horses and coach are spliced in marriage;
Hours pass; no answer; waiting, waiting.
how are your kith and kin today?
how bold or bashful there, and here
how brilliant with its instant tear!
''How can one not love mother Moscow?''
How could she? why, he'd never heard...
''How did you come to marry, nyanya?''
How dull are acting and evasion,
how dull to work for the correction
How early he'd learnt to dissemble,
How early on he learnt to trouble
how envious was I of the waves
However closely he inspected,
However has he earned so vicious,
however much her soul has faltered,
however scarlet; free from error
however strongly she has been
How fearful, in and out of season
how fearful, too, is my obsession
How heavy, and how near to sobbing,
how I interpret this expression:
''How long can you... ?'' ''Dearest kuzina!''
''How long has he been on the scene?
How long he'd been here, was her query,
how long is it?'' ''And since I fed
how many follies were engendered;
how many lines of verse, and themes
How many times I made a toy
How often on the steep Caucasian
How often, when the sky was glowing,
How often, with her sweet communion,
How often would I fall to musing
How oft she'd lead me, by the Tauric
how pleasantly the stages pass.
how proudly, how divinely gleaming,
how sad the scar of passion's knife:
how sensuously her eyes are dreaming!
''How slow you are at guessing, nyanya!''
How soft his glance, or at discretion
how soon the bounds of rank and station
''How Tanya's grown! I pulled your ear
how they remind me of your stem,
how to engage in talk that drew
How well he donned new shapes and sizes --
how well he knew the way to hurt --
how well she'd studied her new role!
human reaction, every speech
humbly I heard your lesson out?
hunts cheeky flies, with swatter sweeping,
Hurrah! let's start congratulating
husband and father as my lot;
Hussars on leave are racing hither
hymnal as, endlessly unfurled,
hymns of the ages never sound.
I
I
I
I
I
I acted thoughtlessly or not:
''I am in love; leave me alone.''
''I am in love,'' Tatyana's wailing
I ask you, each and every poet!
I buttonhole a wandering neighbour
I can see naught, as Hymen's foe,
''I can't sleep, nyanya: it's so stifling!
''I close. I dread to read this page...
I could describe here his attire;
I count each hour the whole day through;
Idle again by dedication,
I'd love you, but inside a day,
I'd not have known you, therefore I
I'd nothing to attract your humour...
I do, I do. Well, where's he gone?''
Idol mio or Benedetta,
I don't know why, but for my friend
I don't mean that she never shivered,
''I don't see what's so bad about it.''
I drag my footsteps hither, yonder;
''I dread your stern regard surmising
I drop my hero... I'll be truthful:
I'd still like dances to this day:
I feel a brotherly affection,
I feel a small foot in my hand;
if her cross mood was at its worst --
if I'd possessed the slightest reason
if I had power to choose your fashion --
if I, like you, had been a bard.
I find myself no longer equal;
I find no sense; the truth is this,
if I show wit in jesting thus.
if, motionless, no life appearing,
if not slow-witted, might have known.
If only Lensky'd known the burning
If suddenly aloft she spied
If Tanya'd had the chance of learning
if you come with me, they'll be flattered;
if you'd still been with me, dear friend,
(if you'll turn back to chapter one)
I gave my word, alas, though now
I gave no rein to sweet affection:
ignores approval's friendly clapping,
I grasp a stirrup with affection,
I had most surely never reckoned
I have no leisure to recall;
I have to drag my feet to it.
I hear the wrath of your reproach.
I hear you say. But can you see
II
II
II
II
II
II
II
III
III
III
III
III
III
III
(I, II, III, IV, V, VI,1) VII
I introduced my saucy Muse
I keep them, and will quote them here:
I kept in mind an ancient store
I know (and seek your exculpation)
I know, Godsent one, I'm protected
''I know it all: my secret ache
I know it, in the thoughts of all
I know it's now in your discretion
I know too surely how it ends.
I know to what malicious laughter
I know your heart: it has a feeling
I lack the strength required to say
I leave the verdict in your hand.
(I like a friendly conversation,
I liked his quality, the dream
I like to tell the time by dinner
I'll catalogue each simple saying
I'll conjure up that swooning fashion
I'll end my tale some other time.
I'll feed the journalists for dinner
I'll float in gondola's seclusion;
I'll gladden your imagination,
I'll go, I'll go!'' - and in a stir
I'll just remark, my verses talk
I'll make them spar another round,
I'll part them, bring them back together;
I'll save this blossom on the shoot,
I'll say: with past ideals in view
I'll set two ages by the ears.
I'll sprinkle you with holy water,
I'll stop that tempter from depraving
I longed, like every breaker hissing,
I love my Tatyana too much!
I love their feet - though I confess
I love you (what's the use to hide
imagination, with such reason,
Imagine it: quite on my own
I make magnanimous confession,
I'm altering my destination
I married. I beseech you, go;
I'm at your service to protect you;
I'm blind to every apparition;
I meant to paint, with Alban's8 glory,
I'm good for nothing now, my sweet...
I'm grateful now with all my heart.
I'm grieving still, but no more tears,
I might have said a word, and then
I might have seen you, heard you speak
immortals picked by fate for when,
I'm much afraid that bilberry wine
I'm near to sobbing, near to weeping!...''
I'm old, my mind is blunted, Tanya;
I move in the grand monde? that rank,
impart such lessons as you please!
impatient, hatred flaming high;
impatiently on the mill-dam,
importune with my lyre, whenever
I'm sick, my dear, I'm sick indeed.
I'm terrified - so let it be...
I must translate - there's no presuming --
I must wake up with the conviction
I'm wandering in a world of dreams...
I'm yours, in a predestined fashion,
in Adam Smith was his diploma;
in albums, blunted the censorious
in all its mystery. Hymen's teasing,
in all the world could take my heart!
in a melodious, flute-like tone.
in any picture of this kind:
in a peaked cap, all dust and fluff, --
in a still stream that never dries.
In backwoods, how d'you pass this season?
in bed, a young man, stiff and chilled;
in boxes or the rows of stalls.
in britzkas, kib&iacute;tkas and sleighs.
in casual letters of confession --
incendiary looks are slinking,
in corners whispering girls concur;
in country towns and suchlike places
in dark attire the new-born day.
in darkest forest depths and drowned
in darkness in her room, or treated
In days of carefree aspirations,
in deep anxiety of mind.
in deepest grasses, quite alone,
in deepest thought at the chess-board
in dreams and cards and their prediction,
in dream toward the woods and plains,
In duels a pedantic don,
in due succession; hers is lifted
I need to rest from all this rhyme:
in empty deeds and futile toils.
I never lived or wrote for praise;
in everything she sees there's not
inexorably wed to duty,
in fact a thorough fop, no less.
in fact by some quite different thought.
In fact one day a note came flying
in far Moldavia, fit for pity,
in fashion's din, at still of night,
in fashion that's half-glad, half-anguished:
in father's or old uncle's book,
in first place - listen, am I right? --
in flannel, and an old fur cap.
in flowers of spring it's drinking dry:
In French Onegin had perfected
in friendly gatherings where I read,
in front of you, on every hand,
in frosted bottle, for the poet
ingenious London has been sending
in goods and fame!'' But the sad-sounding
in gossip's rambling and discursion
in grief that nothing else could mend;
In heart's affairs, a sweet beginner,
inherited from earlier days
in her once more has come alive.
in her own home. She never took
in her torn heart - a fickle gleam;
in his defence, and smash it up;
in his first dream of passion's fruit,
in his small shack, will listen well
in indescribable elation,
in indolence and in rampageous
in ink with colour-wash above;
In languid silence, or the flame
in limpid verse that lives and gleams.
in lives that were just dawning then.
in loaded carriages, migrate,
In love with fame, by freedom smitten,
in Lyc&eacute;e gardens long ago,
in manifesting, as he could,
in midst of a poetic dream,
in midst of trouble, storm or din.
in morning time he'd read a book...
in music's own bewitching fashion
in my long task, be my upholder,
in my petition an approach,
inns don't exist; but in a freezing
in Olga everything expresses --
in one so slothful, so hard-bitten?
in order daily, chez V&eacute;ry,1
in others' houses she may say
in other things you come off best:
''I noticed once, at our chance meeting,
in our affair, the intervention
in our first ages), from no place
in pairs, their hunger driving stronger,
In passion's sluicing rain they freshen,
in, past concierge, up marble stair
in play with her obedient doll
in question, gossip, news and tale,
in quiet flood. A beetle whirred.
in quilted coat, where rays were gleaming
in quilted dressing-gown adorned,
in rose-trimmed bonnets, but malicious;
in rural calm's most secret place!
in Russian never found expression,
in Russian winters thrilled at seeing
In second place the poet might
in secret judgement what he'd done,
in sensible old-fashioned style.
in sheepskin coat with scarlet sash.
in showing how to tell apart
inside a pocket Triquet nurses,
inside the Larins' house fell mute.
in sighs and boredom and deceits
in silence all day she'd remain
in simple but sublime reflection,
insists, when the mazurka ends,
in sledded coaches and coup&eacute;s,
in solitude, as at the start
inspires your lute to sounds of sighing?
installed in me a different devil,
in stars upon the river-brink.
In stead of happiness, say I,
instead the chance to get acquainted
In such an album, friends, I too
in sultry sleep, in lonely bed,
In summertime - for he was leading
In swarms around Tatyana ranging,
in taffeta of mourning black.
in talk, so fruitless and so stale,
In Tanya, what a transformation!
in tears and violent tossing vented
interior d&eacute;cor in the end
in terms of poetry or passion --
in terms where not a word was spared:
in that new couch, no sleep for certain;
in that one sound, for Russian hearts!
In the dark sky, a shooting star
in the deep stillness of the night,
in the expression of its being,
in the far backwoods' deepest heart,
in the full beauty of its frown;
in their gay glass, the borrowed light
in the mazurka he was light,
(in the romantic style, we say,
in the salon new faces meet,
in the saloon, brocade-surrounded,
in these last years all mixed and fluttered.
In the two sisters' rooms extended,
In the white heat of some dissension
In this, dear reader, if you know it,
in this fifth chapter of my work.
in through the door, at swallow's pace,
In time past, objects of affection
in time (to quote the calculation
In time, who knows, the agitation
into a corner, gently makes her
into a modish tyrant's keeping
into an unbecoming brawl.
into a small quit-rent - and got
into his look, the exhibition
into the all&eacute;e, face to face,
into the cups its darkling stream --
into the fields, surveys the morning,
into the mud, a drunken goner,
into the pan. Securely gripping,
into the social whirlabout;
into the tomb's mysterious shade;
into the tomb's wide open portals,
in triumph you'll see winter through!
in twilight of all&eacute;es of lime.
in unison repeat the cry:
in untold beauty close at hand.
in vain on my unworthy soul?
invariably, as time went on,
invention sparkled, then gave way
in warmer airs was half dispersed.
in which, dear friends, we're all afloat!
in which his hero's mould was cast.
in which our hero used to dwell.
in which so lately it abounded
in which the rhymester-man-of-fashion
in winter, on the cast-iron fender,
in winter was her heart's delight.
In winter, when for longer time
in you a tender pulse was beating,
in your cal&egrave;che of foreign cast --
in your pursuit I've come to know it:
I only write like this, you know,
I own it: tender Parny's12 rhyme
I pray God grant his soul salvation,
I prize the attention of my friends,
I put your genius to the test,
I read with secret pain, and never
I really dote upon the word:
''I reckon, by God's will. My Vanya
I regularly take much pleasure
I roam by the secluded lake.
is a compulsive bore by reason
is agony, if I may speak,
is all those stubborn lips desire!
''I?'' ''Saturday. The invitation
is brought to table at full speed.
is calling us, for ever calling --
is dear to me, for it has brought
is death, not pain. So gently gliding
is deep in love, just like a boy;
is dimmed. Down there the valley soon
is dressed, undressed, and dressed once more?
I see another problem looming:
is either the distrait Vampire,
is finished, and I've looked it through
is firmly cast. I don't know whether
is forced to crucify himself,
is graven on that face of stone.
I shall set out on brand-new ways
Is he a Melmoth, a Childe Harold,
is he who's never felt its will,
I signal to each passing sail.
is in voluptuous languor dressed,
is in your poetry enshrined?''
is it not true that Russian speech,
is it that she, poor simple sweet,
Is it that we've become officious
is ''Kit''3 to every maiden's ear.
is known today; only a soul
is lost in obstinate reflection;
is mincing manners - nothing more.
is needed, nothing's left to tell.
is on his feet - in utter stillness
is only Olga: he relieves
Is Others' View,5 that clever lyric,
is out of fashion in our time.
is represented rather truly,
is sad old moon's... Hark! snow is creaking...
is seized by Tambov's poet-sage;
is softly, indolently sleeping,
Is spleen his trouble, or the dumb
is that my feet lack strength to go
is there to lisp its pack of lies.
is the supreme reward. Precisely,
is this - one sees from here the party:
is this the man that you were seeking?
is this then what you can't forgive?
is this the riddle's missing clue?
I still find Gallicism delicious
is tinsel on a life I hate;
Ist&oacute;mina,11 thronged all around
I suffered once from all the madness
is where old master took up station,
is with dull trash that can't cohere:
is yawned away with friends and wife
Italian nights, when I'll drink in
It all seemed new - for two days only --
It baffles me. But I'll repeat
it blabs, and spills them in its tracks.
it brought back Tanya from her trance.
it can't be youth's distemper - love?
It fascinates by its assurance
it frankly, I'm a firm adorer
it had its epigram-potential7...
it had no sparkle of sensation,
I thank him without reservation,
it held me captive; tit for tat,
''I think I'm happy.'' Time to go,
I thought, she'll go this time, perhaps;
it hurts, he laughs, and all in vain
''It is a friend I sing, a youthful
it lacked, of course, poetic heart,
it led him, in these early sessions,
it mastered him in slow gradation;
it may be late, but it's a start.
it melts, away it rushes, racing
it needs no gold if a supply
I too - when I recall Svetlana5
I trust my fate to your direction,
It's agony to watch the hollow
(it's all the same - you well correct us),
it's also true, in battle's rapture,
its barely noticeable stream.
its due oblivion, in the hush
it's easy, without too much fooling,
its echoes, its belated urging,
''it seems that he forgot us all.''
its furrow through the powdery icing;
its glaring feasts, and shrill events,
its grip on him, forgot to count
it's hidden deep in gloom and dust.
its image, then to swoon before
It's late. A breeze begins to roister,
it's late, time's passing... not to mention,
it's like a vanishing newcomer --
it's my profession; he was wearing --
its natural right to rave and flare.
its newness with our faded days,
it's new to us, beyond gainsaying;
''It's nothing.'' And away he flew.
''It's nothing, nurse, nothing, I say...
it's not in him to bring me bliss.''
its nullity I've always hated,
It's over. Supper is proceeding.
its own perfection everywhere,
its pristine charm: heeltaps, and leaps,
It's right and proper that you went.''
its sails go flap-flap as it prances;
''it's time!'' and freedom hears my hail.
It's time: kind-hearted, idle creatures,
It's time she went. But what can I
It's time to drop astern the shape
it stirs her drooping soul to bound
it stood, defiant of destruction
It's true, I'll not misrepresent them,
It's true, the magnet-like attraction
its views, its passions, or its cares!
its wayward tricks, its violent surging,
its winds had blown him far off course.
its work, its torture, its enjoyment,
it's yes or no, but never sir.''
it touched with reverie her leisure,
it was goodbye, Monsieur l'Abb&eacute;.
it was quite torn in half and breaking.
it was that he'd been truly stirred,
it will be our descendants who
it would be painful to depart
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
Iv&aacute;n Petr&oacute;vich still is dumb,
I've drawn a plan and a projection,
''I've dreams and years past resurrection;
I've known too many a haughty beauty,
I've learnt new sadness; but in this
I've learnt the voice of new ambition,
I've no one here who comprehends me,
I've paid my due to classic art:
I've run a mile, I must avow,
I've seen how, trustful in his blindness,
I've wasted too much life away!
I walk the shore,17 I watch the weather,
I was just thirteen years of age.
I was Onegin's friend that season.
I weep, and pray for your protection..,
''I weep... In case there still should linger
I would have chosen none but you
I would have found a friend, another,
I would have had the indiscretion
I write, my heart has ceased its pining,
''I write to you - no more confession
IX
IX
IX
IX
IX
IX
(IX,2) X
jaws masticate as minutes pass:
jealously, shyly, I've imported
jealousy's flame, to light desire;
jointly would tread life's humble way!
just as she'd always been, she tripped
just as the Poet15 paints himself.
just at this crisis of his gale,
Just before dinner, from his labours
Just facing Tanya's where they're sitting;
''Just half a glass more... that will do...
Just let yourself be your whole care,
just like a casual guest who might
just like a shadow, or a wife.
just like, on turf, your fleeting tread.
just look, and never mind the chatter...
just now of wrestling with his shade,
just send your grandson on his way.''
just sentries to each other calling,
just there, is talking to the Spanish
just what the nightmare signifies.
just yesterday.'' ''And since your christening
kept asking: "shall I live to see"...''
Killed!... At this frightful word a-quiver,
killing each evening off like that?''
knowing the offender, he'd been frightened
L
L
L
L
lacing her stays up very tightly;
ladies at the fireside confer,
Ladies came over, crossed to meet her,
ladies of riper years, delicious
Ladies of such a cast, I think,
ladies who glide on waxed parquet.
La morale est dans la nature des choses.
land where I learned to love and weep,
land where my heart is buried deep.
La, sotto giorni nubilosi e brevi.
last many a day, and many a night!
last night he'd erred in making fun,
''Last night, what made you fly so early?''
lately he married off his boy.''
late of Tambov, Monsieur Triquet
lawgiver to the modish world?
lay on the fields; in caravan
leads Olga and Tatyana on
leave far behind that city-gate.
led to the princess, all a-shiver,
Left-handed from the habitation
left her to follow her own line,
left quite alone with his own soul,
Legends, and mystical traditions,
Lel6 floats about above her head;
lend ears to my lugubrious tone:
Lending his tone a grave inflection,
Lensky all evening, in distraction,
Lensky at home awaits the answer,
Lensky composed in autograph
Lensky disliked the entertainments
Lensky had a curt word to say
Lensky has watched: his rage has blazed,
Lensky ingenuously related
Lensky of course was quite untainted
Lensky rejoiced. His designated
Lensky resolved before the duel
Lensky, restored to his manorial
Lensky's estate, there lives and still
Lensky's thrown down. The murk is thick
Lensky, that tragic victim, died...
lest he should by some clever trick
lest in forgetfulness complete
lest signs of casual weakness drew
let evening pass, tomorrow too --
let fall his pistol on the ground.
let me acquaint you on the nail
Let me look back. Farewell, umbrageous
let no more such digressions lurk
let not the poet's soul of passion
Let others learn from his example!
Let's go, our friendship's worth the labour!''
''Let's go.'' The friends, all haste and vigour,
let's go together, take a rest...
let's go where, winding all the time
levy their tribute on the plain;
LI
LI
LI
LI
lickspittles who adore their crawling,
lies bright, and vast beyond perceiving;
lies in a coverlet that ripples
life's real meaning would have found him;
lifts her from bed as it foretells
lift up the gauzes of her veil,
light as a shadow, shuns a meeting,
light dreams for new ones... so we see
lightly attired, like the creator
LII
LII
LIII
LIII
like a drunk traveller in a shelter,
like a majestic moon, she drives
like a sweet child. She'll never say:
like a true friend, to speak my name.
like Chatsky,5 he arrived to fall
Like convicts in a dream released
like Delvig3 when he's dining drunk.
like fields in spring when storms arrive.
like fluff before Aeolian breezes;
like foliage in the rotting fall.
like irksome phantoms, null as zero.
like mindless youth, the waltz goes by
Like modish parquetry, the river
Like modish rhymes that lack all reason,
like native idiom from their lips?
(like passion's dream, that other revel)
like Regulus, that god of honour,
lions adorning gateway posts
Listen to me without resentment:
listless, impatient, for the pounding
LIV
LIV
lived to the age of twenty-six;
lively, capricious, and inane...
liven the drowsing of my heart,
LIX
locked himself up inside his den
log cabin a pretentious-teasing
long life to our dear friend, Bordeaux!
long, lively tales from wonderland,
long, long ago... no, that could be
long since, like brother linked to brother,
long since unstirred by praise and fame
Longtime inside this modish cloister,
looked down in an access of hate,
looked on a river: far away
look here, as a provincial miss
''Look quickly to the left, d'you hear?''
looks at him with a steady gaze,
look through the pane, and squash the flies.
''Look to the left? where? what's the matter?''
Lord Byron's portrait on the wall,
Lord Byron, with his shrewd caprices,
lorgnettes of jealous fashion-leaders,
Lost in our backwoods habitation
lost them without regret's contusion,
Louder and louder sounds the wrangle:
loved someone else, not her intended,
Lovelace, or Grandison, or neither;
Love passed, the Muse appeared, the weather
love's crown, delectable, awaited
Love's frantic torments went on beating
love's melting dreams shall fill my rhyme,
Love tyrannises all the ages;
&lt; amongst the soulless men of pride,
&lt; ...
&lt; My gaze pursues them... but on station
&lt; Petushk&oacute;v's nails and spurs are sounding
&lt; that there existed, for the indulgence
&lt; XXXVII7
LV
LV
LVI
LVII
LVIII
LX
Madame de Sta&euml;l, Bichat,13 Tissot,14
made all fates look the same... and so
made London's dandy his professor.
made over to them his whole lot,
madman, can you forget their print?
magic of sleep had started claiming
maiden in this superb, unthinking
''Maidens, pretty maidens all,
maid-servants from the whole estate
Maidservants on the beds just now
make Juvenal his text, or better
makes to her nurse low-voiced remark:
''Make way, make way,'' goes up the shout;
Malfil&acirc;tre
Manzoni and Chamfort,12 perusing
Martin Zad&eacute;ka fails to mend;
Martin Zad&eacute;ka was the siren,
maybe bore off with it for ever
may chorus, when she comes in sight,
may spend a century in flaying
may then amuse my glad decline.
may wind up my career as poet;
meantime she'd give the maids a beating
meanwhile a hallboy handed cream;
Meanwhile another new landowner
Meanwhile, attired for morning strolling
Meanwhile my novel's opening section
Meanwhile Onegin starts to languish:
meanwhile the local Cyclops, aiming
Meanwhile the news of Eugene coming
meanwhile with a dissembler's duty
Meanwhile with pain her soul was girdled,
Melmoth,7 whose roaming never ceases,
Melpomene wails long and loud,
men made their bows, and sought her eye;
men's thoughts, their plots, the words they speak,
menu, hung up for show, excites
methodical by disposition,
meticulously; in my fiction
midst crones with endless tears to shed,
might have resounded long and loud
military-foppish, diplomatic --
mills, lands and waters - he whose goods
misunderstanding, noise, and blame!
Moments of silence, quite unbroken;
moment the assembly seemed to shake...
Monsieur l'Abb&eacute;, the mediocre,
monsters the maiden stood revealed.
moonscape, the half-light overall,
more and more bored by yearning's text,
more and more brightly still they blaze.
more closely at the grammar-book;
more joy still when with mute insistence
more searching than Chateaubriand;
more tender than it used to sound.
more thoroughly, thank God, the creature
More tolerant in his conception
More wine, he calls, to drench the flaming
Moscow has beauties and to spare:
Moscow... how many strains are fusing
Moscow, loved daughter of Russia,
Moscow's the place, the marriage-fair!
mother implored me; my sad station
motionless as one soundly sleeping
mountains are piled on every carriage,
mountains will part; below the deep,
moved and surprised, she stays serene,
moves the young watcher (as was known
Muse of the epic, bless my work!
Mushrooms in brine, for winter eating,
must be my theme, if you'll allow.
must be to hold in detestation
must now employ my pen; somehow
my Africa,18 where waves break high,
my carefree song would thus reveal
''My dearest heart, you're sick and ailing.''
''My dear good sir, I'm short of money.''
my declaration may give rise!
my disillusioned glass, and yearn,
My early bird! you know, last night
my fate, it leads me to what end?''
my father blessed me. So I'd spend
my friends, I need to pause a spell,
My friends, the bard stirs your compassion:
my giddy mistress made me proud.
My goddesses! Where are you banished?
my golden days when spring was dear?
''My goodness, how the years do fly!''
My heart awaits you: you can turn it
my hours in fear and bitter crying.
my house, my evenings, all that state --
my husband for his wounds in battle
my inept pupil, at that hour,
my last poor lepton for a sup!
my life in a domestic plot;
my little feet, where have you vanished,
My love for it is just as tender,
My mind is fuddled.'' ''Tell me, nyanya,
my noon is here, and that's the truth.
My pen, as once, no longer hurries
myself and Eugene, lest a reader
my soul had heard your voice ring clear,
my soul in secret gave survival;
My soul's like crystal, and tomorrow
my span, that fortune's jurisdiction
my strange, incorrigible man.
my student cell: she opened up
''My sweet, God warrants me your debtor.''
''My sweet, my dearest heart, I'm old,
(my tale's beginning here repeats);
my task, so vivid and so serious
my tedious taste for feeling free.
my thoughtless pen has stopped designing,
my tongue kept drawing from the heart --
My uncle - high ideals inspire him;
my word; no welshing, as I live. &gt;
my wretched Lensky in his heart
nanny, companion of my youth;
Napoleon here, intoxicated
Napoleon's our sole inspiration;
Nasce una gente a cui 'l morir non dole.
Necker
need not have bristled like a beast;
neighbours and friends in kindly group,
neighbours in high content are wheezing;
Neighbours in whispered tones are taking
neighbour was sure, from this would flow
never come and like a spy
Never come and overhear
new depths of boredom.'' ''No, the same.
new guest is gradually progressing,
Next day Tatyana, early waking,
night of the second, started flaking.
no, all devoured by passion's madness
No, all in her was calm and plain.
No answer comes. Another letter
No answer comes. He goes, for better
no artifices of the vain...
no beauties of a foreign clime,
no boy, to fight or take offence --
no brilliant truth, no vivid scene;
no deathless truths, nothing scholastic;
No doubt about it, it's Eugene.
no dream. You'd scarce arrived, I reckoned
No, early on his heart was cooling
no, even her eyebrow never quivered,
''No, every minute of my days,
No feast, no welcome-gifts - with fire
no, forests are the sole retreat
no fuss; our belly has the power
no glance so sweet, no sigh so teasing,
no haughty stare around the press,
No hope! no hope! He leaves the revel,
No ice and flame, no stormy weather
No, incorrect and careless chatter,
noise in her ears, glare in her eyes...
Noise, laughter, bowing, helter-skelter
No, I was born for peace abounding
no longer does the herdsman chase
No look, no word for him: she's chosen
No madrigals were for inscribing
no magic fancies of the poet,
no mannerism, no affectation,
no mansions, no ballrooms, no bards.
No matter; fate's decree is just.
no matter: hope, in child's disguise,
no meaning in or out of season,
No moralizing from this joker;
no move she makes, no breath she draws;
none listens when the others speak,
No, never in the hottest fire
''No, no, I'm sure the party's small.
no noise of gaiety, no time
no, not for long were belles the ruling
no, nothing caused his heart to stir,
no notice of them. But I've chattered
nonsense will earn indulgent looks,
no one recalls him or his verses;
No one's, I swear by God! in sadness
no one was ever so engrossed:
No one will think that worth gainsaying,
no paradise can stay serene.
No path to see: the snow has drifted
no proud pretentions to success,
no, quite naively I'll retell
nor crawled in suppliant attire.
nor from the bath-house roof be clearing
nor his,2 who sings of Finland's maid.
nor turned a poet. In the burst
nor will my scribbling in such books
No secret crimes, and no perditions,
No, she's already pledged her word
No sleep, beneath that silken curtain,
no softball for the winds of fashion,
No, soon she changed her old demeanour:
no sound by which her soul is stirred.
no spark of fun in all its rot!
no, Tanya's more endearing far.
not bad at all; and then each soul
not cold, but also not effusive,
No tearstains, nothing. Wrath alone
not even by chance, once in a while,
not even in her earliest age;
not every day could he wash down
not for the first time he succeeded
nothing could alter or could tire
nothing more lovable than he.
nothing was barred beyond discussion --
nothing you did gave cause for blame:
no time to pick it up - she's dying
not once a day a thought will quiver,
not only by Evgeny's eye;
not only pain, too much to meet...
no trace of ink, no spots, no stains.
not separation's chilling power,
Not so? ''No, sirs, the ode's the thing,
not the plain, timorous, dejected
not to see Olga; in a fret
November stood outside the door.
no vision of her fields is dawning.
no vulgar epigram too much,
Now all was still. Tatyana slept.
now a protruding branch assails her
now as before, inside my breast;
Now brooding thoughts hold his attention
now, by green tablecloths awaited,
now crush with sorrow's dull deployment
now dazzled by one thing's effulgence,
now disenchanted with the next,
''Now don't suppose... let no suspicion...
now even Didelot's tedious stuff.''
Now, faced with this enormous revel,
Now for the first time she's escorted
now free, I once more weave together
now golden autumn's just arriving.
Now hear the friends in dialogue:
Now here's a letter, as you see,
Now he's returned, what role's he dancing?
now I've forgotten all I knew.
Now Latin's gone quite out of favour;
Now, Lensky, would it be so bad
now Lovelace's renown has faded
''Now march.'' And calmly, not yet seeking
Now Nature's tremulous, pale effect
Now nearer... hooves... and in the yard
No word: another day goes by.
no word came flowing from his quill;
now pay attention, I beseech,
Now powder's greyish stream is slipping
now sensitive, and now carefree,
Now, she devours, with what attention,
Now she's alarmed; in desperate worry
now she's bereft, and just the same
now sweet, his slumbers are distraught.
Now Tanya's groaning, now she's sighing;
now ten has struck, his wheels are rolling,
Now that the British Muse is able
Now the mazurka sounds. Its thunder
now things are changed, now we resemble
Now, to my cost it may be true
now warmth and blossom are on hand,
no years of absence past returning,
Nursed in the orient's languid weakness,
''Nurse, I'm not ill; I... I'm in love.''
O Adrian waves, my invocation;
Oak-floored, and simple as a stable:
objective of his thoughts and joys:
oblivion of life's stormy ways,
O Brenta, I'll see you in dream;
odd volumes from the devil's shelf,
O dreams, o dreams, where is your sweetness?
''OE'' devotedly inlaced.
of absence on my wandering ways!
of a delicious, guiltless dream...
of any Br&eacute;guet: and in passing
of a provincial ing&eacute;nue,
of ardent speech, that aching flow
of aunts and mothers, and the thrall
of blind Fortuna and of men
of Bogdan&oacute;vich's11 refrains.
of boiling youth did I desire
of calculated slander should,
of calm and reason, when the flame
of certain ladies' tiny feet.
of chalk the window-panes have taken.
of childish pranks: a chilled reaction
of children, though as young as they,
Of course, the love of tender beauties,
Of course. Yet fashion's wild rotation,
of course! you're bidden there next week.''
of Dian's visage, in our fancies
of distant countries, of moonlight...
of eloquence, and just the same
of entertaining the half-dead:
of Eugene, cold as all creation,
of evening, and those tears, the balm
of every funeral far and wide;
of fallen glory. Well! don't wait,
of far-away Onegin's name.
of fate, and life, each in its turn
of finishing its book, but early
of five more steps they went, slow-gaited,
of goblets, tall and slender pretties;
of gossip, and set comment humming
of grammar, Russian language too.
of Gulnare, he would play a card
of happy love. For I have been
of her own horses, not the post,
of hills has hid the moon; for certain
of his intent; and a reaction
of his Och&aacute;kov7 decoration!
of his own room, how cruel spleen
of hope and gloom, romantic-fashion,
of hope is somehow still surviving
of hope sometimes disturbs my heart;
of house-familiars stands dismayed...
of human friendship, holy men,
of husband's friendship - worst of all!
o fields - to you I'm vowed at heart.
of inexperience would have passed,
of innocence: a lily blooming
of instant thoughts, a fleeting trace
of its unvarnished monochrome.
of jealous girls, devote its strain?
of jealousy has made her start,
of jealousy, to seem to tremble
of kindling smiles in ladies' eyes.
of ladies and of freakish fops.
of ladies' heads, and ladies' feet;
of language which, so long ago,
of leaves that autumn killed for good,
Of Lensky's fate they said no more --
of life's repast betimes, nor sought
of light that flowering fields reflected:
of listening like a judge-supreme
of lovelorn girls was nothing new?
of love's anxiety. Blessed is he
of love so timorous and gentle.
O flowers, and love, and rustic leisure,
of many distant lands he sang
of mind got clarity new-found;
of mocking turn, or else a breeder
of modish belles the modish foe,
of moralistical persuasion,
of Morpheus had induced relief
of Moscow in the mournful days
of Muses' offspring; sitting down
of neighbouring owners of the earth --
of Neva's proud imperial water,
of old-lime hospitality.
of Olga: love's that kind of bore!
of oligarchical converse,
of one sole thought holds him in keeping
of other's thought - a splendid goal;
of our first meeting face to face,
of passion's out, and its whole manner
of perfect bliss in you. Enough!
of philosophic brains, about
of philosophic isolation,
of pity for my wretched state,
of pity: in his silent bow,
of plains where boredom reigns complete,
of powers unripe, or on the wane,
of prejudice that's never been
of raging passion's surge and roll
of ranks and ages so diverse.
of reason's icy intimations,
of recompense beyond endurance,
of Richardson and of Rousseau.
of rugs, and carpets' rich refinement.
of Russian verse, its force in action, --
of ruts that grace our fatherland.
of secret pain... but it's now rated
of secrets, like a friend but dearer,
of seeing the world? what on earth could be better?''
of sense and judgement. For his part
of sighs, and compliments, and fire;
of simple product supplements it.
of sleeplessness, faint inspirations,
of social buzz and modish riot,
of solitude, and peace abiding!
of something vague, some misty clime;
of spires and belfries, in a cup
of spring he lives, he's energetic;
of sudden brightness... it's too curious...
of sumptuous flowers and luscious fruit.
of sunlight makes it flash and crumble,
of swaddling clothes - already blighted!
of swooning, Tanya nearly dies;
of tales of girls, and ghosts, and lore:
of Tanya's image... Ah, how great
of tears will cloud her tender gaze.
of tempests, in what raging ocean
Often of course you'll have inspected
Often she halts against her will,
of that old duellistic fox,
of the cotillion's endless theme
of the dull shores of my disfavour,
of their society turned her savage,
of the most harmless, hopeless trash.
of the old Tatyana. Eugene tried
of the Terpsichorean foot.
of the two girls; their premonition
of the whole world, her nurse alone,
of this our novel we reported,
Of those who heard my opening pages
of time between the wolf and dog.)
of traveller's tedium at its peak:
of trumpet, dagger, mask and sword,
of Twelfth Night's chillest, iciest air.
of unaffectedly fantastic
of useful objects that the curious
of virgin fancy, and again
of waiting for the dawn to blush,
of wandering tribesmen; while the ravage
of whispering woods where my Eugene,
of wild repentance and devotion
of work made him feel sick, and still
of your slim prints! though this be treason
of youth, so tender, so intense?
oh, &agrave; propos: Larin's a dear
Oh God, what did he think!'' A dream
oh! her young dove, the natural hearer
Oh, I've no strength... I'm tired, my chest...
''Oh nurse, a favour, a petition...''
''Oh nurse, I'm sad, I'm sad, I'm shaken,
''Oh nyanya, nyanya, I don't question...
''oh, quit your stale, your tedious quacking,
Oh, this could all be false and vain,
Oh, when, and to what desert banished,
old mother winter at her pranks.
old prejudice; all men are zeros,
old Uncle's end was soon to be.
Olga is there, he sees her stand
Olga's adorer comes a-wooing.
Olga's appeared upon the scene,
''Olga,'' she thinks, ''what fate befell her?
Olga's no life in her regard:
Olinka and her mother sent:
Olinka yawned, just like her neighbour,
Omens dismayed her with their presage;
on a fast stallion from the Don,
On an old aunt, who's long been burning
on a small bench by Tanya's bed,
on a small table's oilcloth sheen
on ballroom's looking-glass parquet
on billiard-table rests a cue,
Once home, he brought out and inspected
once I too liked it very much;
once more, at that beloved sight,
once more Corneille's majestic story;
once more he can't await the night;
Once more he counts the hour-bells tolling,
Once more he turned to books, unchoosing,
once more renounces world and din.
once more that touch is fiercely troubling
once more the love, once more the smart...
once on the highway he'd detected
Once Vy&aacute;zemsky,4 who chanced to find her
once, with its foaming and its playing,
on Christmas Eve, he wished me joy:
on cups of coffee, and then later
on dance-floor, at breakup of ball,
on dining-chairs are all prostrated;
one customary grief each hour!
one customary object gleaming,
one day came down that lonely turning,
one finds in war amusing sport,
Onegin comes, and makes excuses;
Onegin, drenched with sudden chill,
Onegin, d'you recall the day
Onegin had no word to say;
Onegin has outrun us all.
Onegin knew enough to savour
Onegin looks with eyes of fire:
Onegin, my good friend, was littered
Onegin - now once more my theme --
Onegin sits at table too,
Onegin's Letter to Tatyana
Onegin's life, you see, was holy;
Onegin spoke about its flights
Onegin's soul encountered there
Onegin still is slumbering deeply.
Onegin's waiting on the ground.''
Onegin swiftly came to know
Onegin too - and there to see,
Onegin too. ''Good Lord, at last!''
Onegin turns, and with a shiver
Onegin was assessed by many
Onegin wastes, you'd almost find
Onegin without more ado
one leads the multitude in thought,
one listened to a chief of mission
One melancholy fop, declaring
one pair! I pay them memory's tribute
one raves in verse like me, and one
one sees a duck and aims his gun,
one smoothes the pillows down in bed,
one thing inspired his breath, his heart,
on Eugene, he was deeply stirred:
on Eugene's lips. In his dejection,
O, never know these frightful dreams,
one wallows in delicious weeping;
''One winter's worth, you've surely got;
on features known, but to that dreary,
on Finland's coast a lonely rover --
on foot, by seven o'clock, until
on goose's neck, a skull looks cheerful
on her conquest, we leave my sweet;
on her smug face a flush of pleasure.
on jam, and speeches in regard
on kennels, and on kith and kin,
on liquor, and on hay brought in,
only by rule, and strict tradition
Only from Tanya's heart, no cheering --
only in January the snow,
Only Tatyana does not sleep,
Only the estate provides a setting
Only the ode, that solemn story!
only the pallor of heart-breaking
only to Eugene showed their worth;
on me, all this has no effect:
on modish malice, coarse of grain
on most occasions between friends,
on my untimely urn be weeping,
on Olga; from heart's ache still spared,
(on orders which of course presume
on points that all long since agree --
on Richardson gone raving mad.
onset of the incipient yawn,
on springtime grasses of the field,
on stage are thumping without cease;
on state affairs; there was a wit,
On such indifference, such forgetting
on the cotillion, as amends.
on the dull life that bachelors lead;
On the first sheet you'll find a question:
on the highroad the wolves come out;
On the seashore, with storm impending,
On these, with something like obsession,
on this unstable life, my friends!
On this we'll part; goodbye again!
onto the porch, and fussed about
on tragedy; but it's no joke,
on unknown ladies in the tiers;
on visits to us, and in greeting
on waves of far niente floated,
on which a carpet has been spread,
on which the world is doomed to spin.
On whom alone can we depend?
on words of foreign derivation,
opens the door a tiny slot...
open the window, sit down near.''
oppressed by emptiness of soul,
oppressed her like a heavy dream.
or, after some dull dinner's labour,
Or, as by Lethe's bank he slumbered,
or borrow, say, from me, if not.''
or cause the bursting of his bubble,
or cunningly create a quarrel,
or did her grief soon find repair?
or dim her, dazzle as she might.
or else a novel.'' ''And my daughter
or else a query's wondering hook.
or else disturb my mournful trance
or else does nature, fresh and staring,
or else, from far off, he could see
or else lifts up a fallen shawl.
or else, my friend, how does it look?
or else... or else, may God forfend it!
or for a lamentable manic,
or for that Demon4 of my dream.
or for the modishly luxurious --
or Freisch&uuml;tz as it might be played
Or from all notion of enjoyment
or half-unwittingly preferred
Or he knew how to reconcile them
or if himself, with rage arousing,
Or, in your lonely homestead, moping,
or joined us poets. His conversion
or just grammatical mistakes,
or kiss the border of her dress.
or languid bosoms; and no visit
or letters in a young girl's hand.
or make men seriously discuss
or mother; and in all the play
or novelties from fashion's page.
or of Ist&oacute;mina, my sweet,
or on the granite of the bay.
or pine, persuade of yes or no,
or pining, Olga's hours were brief.
or quizzing-glasses of know-alls
or Russia's chondria, for short;
or seminarist in yellow shawl!
or servants waiting on her pleasure.
or simply bow: within her being
or something tenderer still, for you.
or some vile agent of perdition
or stirring annalistic must;
or, sweeter, like a butterfly
Or, unconsoled by the returning
O rus!
O Russia!
or, with an epigram-surprise,
or worse, to a soir&eacute;e. Unheard
O spring! o time for love! how sadly
others prescribe a watering-place.
others will follow where they tread...
our deep economist had got
our disposition being invented
Our evanescent northern summer
our friend Kat&eacute;nin8 brought to bear
our hapless Tanya! An emotion
our joy in you is warmly taken.
our kin are folk whom by profession
our lives were flat, and what had fired
Our love is what they most abhor;
our modern Russia's plague and bane.
our Mother Eve: we're never falling
our native speech had never sprung
ourselves on our landfall. It's true,
ours was no Grandison - not he.
our terror is their consolation.
our troikas effortlessly dashing,
our vessel's long been overdue.
out of the hand of that same bard:
out of this world will crowd us too.
outside and in they star the night;
Outside the gate Tatyana parted
outside the house. But you'll be aching
outside, the scarlet rays of dawning
over his neighbour's plain memorial,
over it a mysterious wreath:
over the business of leave-taking,
over the modish word ideal,
over the note holds in suspension
over the Petersburg pav&eacute; --
over the slush, where is he chasing?
over the waters in a sweep;
packed from the maids' wing to the hall.
paled, flushed, or lost composure's grip --
pale transcript of a vivid master,
panes patterned by the finest printer,
pans, mattresses, and trunks, and chairs,
parade before their mocking gaze
Parisian taste invents for one --
parks, monasteries, towers and ledges,
parodies winter in the south;
parterres, she runs to rivulet's brink,
parting with Olga made him think
passion and dreams of pensive cast.
passion's rough language talked by others,
past all endurance. You're referred
past all the assembly in a whirl,
past ice-blocks, blue and squared away,
past the grand ladies, see her glide;
paterfamilias (unwed),
paved roads will traverse Russia's length
peasants, and fashion-shops, and sledges,
penates, came to cast an eye
pen, tears, and rhymes, and all the rest?
peopled my sleep, and to their theme
people there were he glorified,
perfervid language of the bard,
perfidious blow to my inside,
perhaps for fame, he was endowed;
perhaps - for flattering hope will linger --
perhaps her love could in the end
Perhaps however, to be truthful,
perhaps no more sensations lumbered
Perhaps some secret apprehension
perhaps, though Phoebus warns, I'll see
Perhaps to improve the world's condition,
Perhaps, when thoughts are all a-quiver
perpetually, one goal for dreaming,
perplexed... and rooted to the ground.
persisted and made no amends.
Petrarch
Petrovsky Castle; and the fame
Petushk&oacute;v, local Paris, tearing,
Pikht&iacute;n, of the Hussars, was here;
piled books, and through the pane the sable
pinker than glow of Northern morning,
Pistols are out, they gleam, the hammer
plagued by her ghastly dream, and tries
play on the window's frosted lace;
Pleasant, in spite of its compression,
Please follow me. And here's the inner
plunged in reflection's deepest train,
poetic dreams, a brighter fire.
poetic in her simple pureness,
poetry's sacred frenzy, made
Poets, I'll say in this connection,
pointed each year, for time to come,
poor girl, to drop into a faint,
Poor Lensky! Set aside for weeping,
Poor Lensky! where the tomb is bounded
poor Tanya more intensely burns;
Poor Tanya's bloom begins to languish,
''Poor Yorick,'' said he, broken-hearted:
Porcelain and bronzes on the table,
portfolios nobly illustrated
pours out its guiltless frank admission,
pouted, and swore in furious passion
praised his fierce courage in its day:
Praskovya re-baptized ''Polina'';
Prepared for prophecy and fable,
prepares himself; and then his verse,
present her languor and distraction
Presently Olga's ringing answer
Present me, please.'' ''You're joking.'' ''Never.''
presses its forebears to the tomb.
pretty maidens, romp away,
prevailed, and with composure steady
Priam-like agricultural sages,
pride's icy calm, the combination
Prince N. respectfully invites him
Princess Alina. She was still
''Princess, mon ange!'' ''Pachette!'' ''Alina!''
Prince Vyazemsky
prince, who in that dark-red b&eacute;ret,
printed among outmoded airs;
proclaims where ponderous P&uacute;styakov
products of carefree hours, of fun,
proficiency to speak and write,
profoundly sunk, Tatyana stalked
project in silhouette the tops
promptly had nothing left to give.
pronouncing through her nose politely
propped in the door among the press.
Protect me from such apparition
Proud Albion's lyre is what I follow,
Public opinion - here's our idol,
punctilious in his cotton cap,
pure passion's flame, and in a trice
purport of other lines; intense
pursue his love - and at one bound
pursue his pencil. Everywhere
pursuits of a monotonous breed
put a strong staff into my hand,
put back the libel on the table
puts out the lamps; the whole brigade
''Qu'&eacute;crirez-vous sur ces tablettes?''
quickly to O... I mean to that...
quite self-absorbed and unaffected
radiance of Dian, sits in pain
Rage died, and jealousy's obsession,
raised a dull eye to moon's refulgence,
raised nose and shoulders high and wide
ranges, Lenora2-like, she'd ride
ran through the fields, sheer panic fright
rapture was just two weeks ahead;
''r&eacute;veillez-vous, belle endormie.''
reader, by painting you a scene
Reader, I wish that, as we parted --
reader, or where you've shone and glittered!
Reader, the elder sister now
reader, we must be separating,
Reader, whatever fate's direction,
reader, you ask, and I'll expound --
ready to share our quiet leisure
really more bearable to you
reap a brief harvest on their furrows;
rebuffed, found instant consolation;
recall, by its bewitching cup,
recalling earlier loves, did we,
recalling earlier time's romances,
reduced to sense, not without pain --
red wine in tumblers to the brim --
reflection or provoked dispute:
Reflection was her friend and pleasure
regard, and slipped away for good, ...
Relations. No-one else at all.
relations off, and never spoke.
relined and strengthened for the drive;
reluctant to exhaust the boy,
remains unmoved: still he's persistent,
Remember the retort satiric!
rendered them tedious to each other;
repeats what her mama has taught.
replies: ''We might as well.'' They walk
resigned disposal of your fate.
resigned himself to prison's ties,
respect, and mercy for my dreaming.
retired, as he, from fashion's stream,
retired, forgotten by his brothers,
return an answer, blunt or keen,
Revenge's hour is near, and after
reverie hounds you, and you find
revive it with another shove --
rewards the music of your mind
Riding on the lugubrious prairie?
Right at the outset of my story
right from the cradle of her days;
right in the flower of joyous hope,
rigorously though you'd inspect --
rings proudly in that sombre name.
ripen, and find a new expression --
Risen with earliest rays of dawning,
roamed the still forest like a ranger,
roofs, flowerbeds, fences, all in white,
roses romantically blowing;
round Tanya congregate the misses,
round the dim river sleep; the curtain
Rousseau (forgive a short distraction)
rumours and threats and premonitions,
runs after what is sweet, and vain.
rushed to Anisia's room, to plunder
Russian pancakes were always served;
Russia's old glories and their gleams,
Russia's Terpsichore, shall never
sacred to children of Apollo!
sadly he mourned for the departed.
sad meditations in her look,
Saint Petersburg's fine flower was there --
same Pom, same husband to the end;
sang for the guests above the wine;
saw through the window, morning-bright,
says the old lady in a croak:
Sbogar,8 mysterious through and through,
scarcely recalled their love, their spite;
scarce out of bibs, already fickle,
scarlet with passion's instant flaring,
Schiller and Goethe had refined him,
screened by a hill from storm's intrusion,
seacoast, to hear in dark of night
Searching the table exegetic
seared as by fire, she stopped. Today
secluded vales, where swans were crying,
secretly overheard by you.
secret sledge-rides in verse of fire;
secure a secret assignation,
sed alia tempora! The devil
Seeing herself as a creation --
Seeing Vladimir had defected,
see with their jugs the milk-girls go
self-portraits only - furthermore
self-willed it may be just the same;
Semy&oacute;n Petr&oacute;vich, mean and glum,
send them good wishes through the mail
sensitive ladies of all ages --
sent at the Colonel's own behest.
sentiment, notebook, verses, all
sent to seduce? Resolve my doubt.
sequence of dinners stretch away,
servant of God, and Brigadier.''
set off our troubled mind comparing
set off the ladies like a frame.
sets a sonorous cadence rolling --
sets out upon her homeward course;
sets the wise traveller cavorting
set the guests smiling at his arch,
set to well-known children's glee:
Shade-like, in purposeless obsession
shadows that flit behind the glazing
Shall I depict with expert knowledge
shall I see you?'' As Tanya speaks
shall make my story grim as hell;
shall my sad gaze no more alight
shall not attack my lily's root;
sharing her in promiscuous fashion,
sharpness of wit, and social art,
she appears before him, grim and frozen.
she blossomed in the graceful ways
she brought her talents, never ceased,
she burst into a coughing-bout.
she calls down curses on their leisure,
she can't; and in her panic hurry
she can't escape at any pace --
she can't; Evgeny's pushed the portal,
she can't make out a single fraction
she'd cheer my wordless way, and do
she did what nurse advised she do
she'd never join the game selected,
she'd never tell them news or scandal
she doesn't see, or doesn't mind;
She dreamt of portents. In her dreaming
she drinks it like a priceless potion;
She dropped... ''It's he! Eugene arriving!
She enjoys the stately orchestration
She entered the deserted yard.
She faced him, questioning: ''But you?...''
she fell in love - the hour was fated...
she fell in love with all the fancies
she finds, in order alphabetic:
she finds in river and in hill.
she finds it stifling here... she strains
she flails around, she tries to shout --
she flies as fast as she can go;
she flies no more, she's lost her strength.
She folds the page, lays down the plume.,
she found Evgeny, eyes a-glitter,
she found, in labours and in leisure,
she grew accustomed, and contented.
she guards, in silence and for good,
She hates a friendly voice's sound,
She hesitates, and doubts beset her:
she holds a letter up, and leaning
''She knows you?'' ''Why, we lived next door.''
she lacked her sister's beauty, lacked
She'll not see him, her obligation
she'll spin this way and that, and beat
She looked across, felt in her heart
She looks: forgotten past all chalking
she looks, the room is getting light --
she lost the language of the gods
She loved the balcony, the session
she loved the steppe-land and its singing,
she lowers darkened eyes, unwitting,
shelter for trysts at every turning;
she never even bit her lip.
she never joined, or skipped, but rather
she never read a Russian paper,
she once had pined in girlish grief,
she peers discreetly through a chink
she quite forgot - began to call
she roams the empty garden-plot...
she sang of childhood's fun, indited
she sat there; through her teeth a word
she saw no friendly figure starting
She's dressed since dawn, dead pale; debating,
She's dropped her sash's silken billow;
she sees it all. The simple maiden,
She's fallen in the snow - alertly
She's here, she spreads abroad; she stipples
she sighed, and in a trance coopted
She's in the wood, the bear still trails her.
She sits down by the window-sill.
she sits down calmly on one side,
she sits with head sunk on her breast,
She sits with Nina8 at a table --
''She's mine!'' Evgeny's voice of thunder
she's nearly swooned, she's suffocating;
''She's not in love?'' ''There's no one, ever.
She's paid the sunrise no attention,
she speeds her footsteps to a race,
she spins and, friend of winter nights,
she's their great friend, asked in, caressed,
she stopped at the loud torrent's bound,
She struck one as the incarnation --
she's turned up in my garden, bringing
she's up and flying through the air
she treads our earth, and how her breast
she trembles, and with fever drumming
she visited the humble tents
she walked across a snowy plain
she walked, but just as she was turning
She wanders on without direction.
She was alone, lit by the moon.
She was like him and always sported
''She was the one who looked as still
she was unhurried, unobtrusive,
She went - and Eugene, all emotion,
she went inside the empty shell
she won't inhale the powdered rime,
she wrote in French... what a confession!
she yields to it without condition
shine out and bring the world to bliss. &gt;2
Shishkov,6 forgive me: I don't know
shocked by their modish pride, and fleeing
shortened, or lengthened off the page.
Shot through below the chest - and streaming
should have been analysed when caught,
Should your perfections be expended
showed one a pattern of perfection
show me the sense. Divine decree
shows freedom's advocate, that strong
shows up through trees, all of a grovel
shutters are opened and the soft
shutters are up, and all is pale
Shy as a savage, silent, tearful,
sickroom attendance night and day
sigh, and stood up, began to pace;
Sign of the urge for domination:
Silence was everywhere enthralling;
silver with moonlight, in her dreaming
simple old lady; but the liquor --
Since dawn, whole families have been driving
Since earliest boyhood he had doted
since I'm a member of the same.
since I stopped sinning years ago.
Since then Martin Zad&eacute;ka's spell
since then my heart was wrenched aside;
since, through the mist that dreams arise on,
Since when is this?'' ''Two years or more.''
sing about something else at last!''
sing God knows whom, compose with art
singing in chorus as directed
sings as he plaits a humble shoe.
''Sit down! how strange! it's like the stage
sit on a flimsy bench, and lays
sits imperturbable, and free.
sits there beside the window-sill!
sits with Limburg's vivacious cheese
slave of the service, was en route.
sledges, and tardy dawns together
sleep much, read little, and put down
sleep runs from her, she turns and turns...
slumber still floats above his head.
smiles, and a maiden's tranquil poise,
smile, voice and movements, little waist --
Smiling through sleep, nature is meeting
smoothe his way out with humour's ointment.
So a disabled soldier-man,
so all went smoothly after that.
so a storm-shadow wraps away
so brilliantly he'd hoax the fools,
so circumspect, and so punctilious,
so, cursing women's devious course,
So down came Tanya, hardly daring
so effortlessly can disarm.
so fires of spring will bring to birth
Softly the door is opened, enter
so, full of heart-felt tribulation,
so gloriously he'd fool the clever,
So glut yourselves until you're sated
so heartless and so detrimental,
so, if we want to change, we can!
so it was not in any measure,
solemn, too long compelled to throttle
so Lensky answered the old dear:
So Lensky wrote, obscurely, limply
''So let it be! for you to keep
So let me with a kind expression
So, like Childe Harold, glum, unpleasing,
solitude, stillness and the night,
so long as they're employed in song:
''some are far distant, some are dead''.
Some days he's still in bed, and drowses,
some disagreeable remarks.
some future dunce will point a finger
somehow have got the designation
some ladies preach from Say and Bentham,
some minutes long. The words won't fit
Some neighbours there have come together;
some nonsense thrown up while carousing,
someone like you and me, just nice?
someone towards whose heart and mind
some other, older spring will gleam,
some regimental bard has added
some splendid lady is referring
something like spleen, that scourge of Britain,
something to fritter and to burn,
something to rack his brains about,
Sometimes a landscape's represented,
sometimes from a fair, black-eyed maiden
sometimes he'd fall into a trap
Sometimes his tricks would earn him trouble,
sometimes, in reverie's sacred land,
sometimes the evening brought together
some vote a doctor for the case,
so much, I'm left no time to speak!
So my Zaretsky, as I said,
so nearly had them in his power.
song, laughter, whistle, bark and champ,
So now be off to Neva's brink,
so often from her Moscow cousin
soon a great truth came to enfold her
soon all that went without a wrench:
sooner or later will relate
soon, infidelity proved cloying,
so pious, and so clever too,
so pure, so spotless through and through,
sorceress-winter's here at last.
so, seeing there no rhyme or reason,
So she was called Tatyana. Truly
so sketchily possessed by each,
so that all three went off to lunch,
So the poor butterfly will quiver
So there she stood, forlorn, deserted!
So to his wife for presentation
''So to strange kinsfolk I was taken...
sought in her book, that text of danger
so unforgiving a report?
So, verse and prose, they came together.
so virtuous that, no sooner seen,
So went his sermon. Almost dying,
So you, inspired Yaz&yacute;kov,4 sobbing
spared her the expense she dreaded most --
spectacled age divines as well,
spelt hazard, ruin and disaster;
spends light and darkness in the dreary
spirit that anguish had made ill.
Spoilt by the habit of indulgence,
spoke words of hope? But who are you:
spread out its shadow all around --
spurs of Chevalier Gardes are clinking,
spying my features, as he could,
squeezes her hand - and brings to flower
stalking the momentary weakness,
stands in dismay and indecision.
stands over my poor nurse's tomb.
stare hard at her before exchanging
started a life of pointless roaming,
startling the ingenuous with a jest,
stays fixed and focused on a vision
stiffening as the hours go by,
still after many years in place.
still as a shadow, grim and bitter;
Still as he was? has he stopped prancing?
Still blazing with resentment's fuel,
still captivated his young soul.
still coughing, hissing, clapping, champing;
still dim, through crystal's magic glass,
still eats and drinks enough for two.
still everywhere the lamps are bright;
still filled with Eugene, Tanya wrote,
Still for ever, fare thee well.
still hardly opened up, from fading.''
still has Monsieur Finemouche for friend,
Still in the porch, exhausted-stupid,
still made of tulle, the self-same bonnet
still meek, still deaf as howd'youdo,
Still on the board, the beakers hissed,
still powdered is Luk&eacute;rya Lvovna,
still shivering in the bitter weather
Still tumbling, devil, snake and Cupid
stirred at your gaze, so strange, so gleaming,
stood in the door, cherubic, mute,
stood thunder-struck. In what wild round
straightened his wig, and asked her name.
straight to his stall, then turns his glasses
Straight up the chimney, pipes were smoking.
Street lamps go flashing by, and stalls,
stretched on a sofa, calls to greet them.
Strike the ditty up, my sweets,
stripping my soul before your eyes!
struck down as if she'd been accused,
struck for Evgeny, with its play
study where he would sleep and feast
stuff of the poet's hallowed dreams!
stumblingly call to mind he did
such careless language of surrender?
such crystalled scents as best are able
Such feckless passion - as I live,
such frank tendresse; away they stole
such good and sensible advice;
such is the usual country cooking;
such rustic cunning can't be wrong!) --
such shadowy and leisured ways,
such stubborn brain, and vivid will,
Such were a young rake's meditations --
Suddenly, from a crest, she sighted
suddenly lowering eyes that languish,
suggests a victim richly decked...
summits of aspen, birch and lime,
summons his people. On the sleigh
Sunk in dejection, she won't hear
surer than friendship or than kin,
suspecting wonders would come out.
swam on the river's dreaming face,
swapped it for odd tomes of Malvina,
swaying the artless, waiting on
sweet as a lover's kiss, and dear,
sweet old tradition was preserved:
sweet talk with friends. How many days
sweet words by which her pain was banned --
swiftly decayed beyond recall
take any novel, clearly traced
take leave of my lightheaded youth!
taken the saucers in their grip,
taken your place, though not your throne?
Take Olga's shoulders now - the beauty!
takes up an hour or two; at last
take wing on spite; that serious men
talk that might turn a young girl's head)
Tanya begins to understand
Tanya comes to in utter fright...
Tanya is gripped. No comment's made
Tanya looks on; her own indictment
Tanya (profoundly Russian being,
Tanya pursued them with her gaze...
Tanya's distress had risked detection
''Tanya's no child - it's past a joke,''
Tanya's no longer quite so frightened
Tanya's undressed, and lies in bed.
Tanya thanks each one with a phrase.
Tanya to all her kin. My sorrow
Tanya today goes hurrying out
Tatyana asked. The children all
Tatyana breathed on the cold pane,
Tatyana dear, with you I'm weeping:
Tatyana'd rise by candlelight.
Tatyana flushed, and started shaking.
Tatyana groaned above the tide;
Tatyana had a changeling look
Tatyana had no dolls to dandle,
Tatyana heard Evgeny out.
Tatyana hears but takes no part;
Tatyana, hiding her condition,
Tatyana, hunted by love's anguish,
Tatyana in a deep emotion
Tatyana in low-cut attire
Tatyana! it's addressed... to whom?
Tatyana leaves Onegin kneeling,
Tatyana listened with vexation
Tatyana, lonely heroine,
Tatyana looks, her faintness passes:
Tatyana looks with pulses racing
Tatyana lowered her regard
Tatyana never knew the attraction
Tatyana now need wait no longer.
Tatyana on; Miss Kharlikova,
Tatyana pined in secret fashion:
Tatyana seeks to attune her ear,
Tatyana sees with trepidation
Tatyana shared with full conviction
Tatyana's haunted by her vision,
Tatyana's heart is rent in two.
Tatyana's here, you know I've brought her...''
Tatyana's husband, now appearing...
Tatyana simply lay in bed,
Tatyana, sleepless in the dark,
Tatyana's Letter to Onegin
Tatyana's letter, treasured ever
Tatyana's love is no by-play,
Tatyana's name day celebration.
Tatyana's rites are not for me.
Tatyana struggles to run out --
Tatyana turned with thirsting soul:
Tatyana3 was her name... I own it,
Tatyana watched the moon, and floated
Tatyana went with them, and sped
''Tell me, our neighbours, are they thriving?
''Tell me, what's your companion doing?''
terse words or crosses in the book,
than households where the wife must moan
thank God, he had no inclination
thank him by curtseying to the dust;
Thank you for all the gifts I treasure,
thank you for sorrow and for pleasure,
thank you for suffering and its joys,
thank you indeed. Alike in sorrow
than most. Evgeny, though he knew
than this humiliating passion
than what our sorrowing rhymesters do?
that alien scene must I now turn
that all of Russia can't contribute
that ardent youth entirely lacks;
that, artless, and without concealing,
that corps of social legislation --
that could sustain it? Only grimness;
that even so my wretched style
that fell, and then began to shiver,
that fiery souls' headstrong enthusing
that fills him and in which he lives.
that fired his soul, to burn the same;
that, for all this, my shame's report
that from the backdoor he'd be leaving
that generations of new beauties,
(that half-pay archivist); and bounding
that he's not honest past all question.''
that huge ballrooms vibrated under,
that I'm just longing to indite --
that inexperience leads to grief.''
that in the usual Christmas scrimmage
that I prefer to Champagne's tide;
That isn't our immediate worry:
that king of the satiric scene,
that lady the hostess was greeting,
that lady whose engaging charm
that languid beauty, listens nicely --
that Lensky and Eugene, apart,
that, like proud Byron, I can draw
that lives, and glitters, and endears,
that marble Nina's proved unable
that, meanwhile, pinched and glum of feature,
that mediocre dress alone
that Menelaus was quite right --
that modish rings were still a-buying.
that moment, of a luscious pie
that night, in secret, set for two;
that not a syllable be uttered
that nubile maid of riper age,
that once I spent my happiest days?
that one be shot just anyhow --
that on the world's staircase there waited
That point I wouldn't mind contesting,
that poison brew; and in your mind
that poisonous worm, despised, degrading,
that queen of secrets and of sighing.
that raves with poetry can ever
that rogue, backbiter, pantaloon,
that sat above the stove and purred
that self-same evening where he'd go.
that she's ''ideal'', begins preparing
that she's so trustful, and imbued
that somehow that same day we'll meet...
that soul without a moral tie,
that spring with me has had its fill
that's the morass, I beg you note,
that's the refrain that you should sing,
that stretched from Romulus in his prime
that strikes him with such force and meaning?
That's when I'll sit down to compose
that's where my years of youth were spent.
that table where the lamp has languished,
that there be just one voice which came,
that there his friend Kav&eacute;rin's5 waiting;
that thievish mouths cannot consume
that this of all things for a swain
that, though polite, was clear as ice.
that verse will turn to useful duties;
that virgin dream and its confession
that visitors must be expected.
that was less clever still by half.
that we enjoy equating chatter
that wicked, loose-tongue chatterbox...
that wit embarrasses the dull;
that with him to the trysting-place
that world where every man's a critic
That year the season was belated
that your proud glance is sure to take!
that youthful heart. ''But now at least
that youthful soul, which pined for sadness;
the abstracted poet would bring forth
the album of a country miss
the all&eacute;e to the lake, the copse;
the altar flame's extinguished now.
the ancients have gone stiff and cold,
the answer's past all human viewing,
The arbitrary rules of passion
the ardent author of the past
the art he'd studied best of all,
the atmosphere of youth and madness,
the audience still is busy stamping,
The aunts exchanged a look, they fluttered,
the ballroom drove me off my head:
the bank, the immobile stream are levelled
The banquet's given no cause for sneezing,
the barbs that envy's always spreading,
The bearded outrider is sitting
the bear explains: ''my cousin's here --
the bear has raised her in his paws;
the bear let out a roar, and held
the bear - what next? - behind her stalked.
the beauties in their flimsy dresses,
the best revenge one could desire.
The better to dispel her sorrow
the big room, further, not a cat.
The bitterness was mine - the ice
the blaze of candles, and the trembly
the bleeding tongues, the tufted tails,
the bliss that fills me when your throbbing,
the blood came smoking from the wound.
the blood within my withered heart,
the bloom has withered on the bough;
The book displayed, not so you'd know it,
the books then underwent inspection...
the boring wives, the ill-bred men,
the boxes; boiling, pit and stalls;
the branches all are weighted down
the branches of the oak with flock;
the brilliant crackpot: this reaction
the cabinet behind the door
the carriage of the newly-wed.
The censor's tribute, I'll arrange:
The ch&acirc;teau was of a construction
the charge that poets are unable
the charm of what was grave and plain.
the child prepares for protocol --
the children spoilt, the mad, the rogues
The choirs of dancers sought their quarters.
the circumstances of his capture
The city's early sounds awake her;
the clamorous honking geese began
the climacteric of our life,
the clink of rowels, met his hearing;
The clock of doom had struck as fated;
the coach has reached its destination;
the coachmen ring the fire, and curse
the cold perfection of the sky,
The comrade of so many days,
the cooks prepare the midday meal;
the coolness of the sombre glade,
the Corsair, or the Wandering Jew.
the country cottages and hovels,
the country's pretty stupid here!
the crash of plates and knives is blended
the crown of marriage was projected
the crush, the glitter and the gladness,
The crush, the heat, as music blares,
the cunning prisoner can quite well
The darkness thins away; but still
the darling objects - don't you know it? --
the darling sex is light as down.
The days flew past; by now the season
the days grew shorter, in the glade
the days that doom has measured out.
the deeper in the wood, the more
the doorway opened wide to meet her,
the downy woods are greener-tinted;
the draught whose blessings are agreed,
the driver sits and cuts a dash
the eager players are enrolled --
the earlier griefs are what I miss.
the early pealing of the bells
the earth for him grew dumb and closed?...
the easier they become to charm,
the elegy, grown paralytic,
''The elegy's just vain protesting,
the enjoyment of a friendly drink,
the entire story of your fate.
The evening passes, and meanwhile
the expanse of fields, so wide, so lonely,
the eyes of all, the hooves, the snozzles,
the faces met with everywhere;
the fateful diet; by depression
the fear and rage with which I foam!
the festal name day has begun.
The fields are dark, since evening came.
The fire was dying; cinders faintly
the first will never find fruition,
the flaming roses of a cheek,
the fleeting tenderness that stole
the fleeting works of my creation,
the flickering tones of dress and speech,
The flirt has reason's cool volition;
the floor serves Triquet for his nap,
the flower-like pallor of the maiden,
the foes, cold-blooded and unspeaking,
the fools who sparkle far and wide,6
the footmen sleep on the pelisses;
the foreign words a maiden's passion
the friends' salute she never hears
the frozen corpse, drives off, and homing
the full fruit of her heart's desire;
the funeral monument explains:
the gallery claps - it's bored with waiting --
the giddiest hope, carefree and gay,
the gift of recognizing what
the girl he'd scorned in what he deemed
the girl remains there in the gloom
the girl's attentive eyes are bent.
the girl's pale charms, her loosened hair,
the girls sing out the ancient rhyme:
the glare, the fumes in which I live,
the grand barouche is on its way.
the grand monde finds it out of place.
the grey-haired nurse with kerchiefed head;
the guardian angel of tradition,
the guests are feasted, good and hearty,
the guests squeeze closer to the centres;
The hall is full of noise and hustle,
the hall's without a living creature,
the hapless Phrygians all the same,
the happenings of the previous night;
The happiness of youth is dead,
the hare who from afar has seen
the hat, the scowling brow, the chest
the headpiece-text is thus indited --
the heartache that they bring lies deep.
the heart and all its fragile dreams.
The hearth was low beyond all stoking.
the heart inside him seemed to shrink;
the heart of the professional flirt!
the heavenly lights in glorious quire
the herdsman's horn proclaimed the morning
the hero's name's decided too.
the highest circles are a bore.
the homely scene, take pleasure in it --
the horns, and the moustachio'd nozzles --
the horrid nightmare must portend
the horror of disgrace and crime,
the horse gets wind of them and, snorting,
The horses, as they sense the dead,
the horses fidget worse and worse;
the hostess cries and, moving fast,
the hour was late. And now from aching
the household boys in noisy rout;
The house is packed out; scintillating,
''The house, the park... I'll go and see!''
the hunter in the wood will swear
the idol that she'll most admire
The illness with which he'd been smitten
the impatient conqueror was humbled!
the imperturbable princess.
the indifferent, or the deadly serious!
the inevitable silly asses,
the infant year with cheerful greeting:
the inmost thoughts that girls can hide.
The invalid's glad salutation,
their breed would (some years after this)
their cloaks; Zaretsky's measured off
their guests, for all they ate and drank,
their hands are dipped in scarlet gore,
their hand to grapple slander's cup,
their hopes, their pranks, their dreams at night --
their journey took them a full week.
their joyous way across the ice;
their looks and language in deceit
Their look, though, shows no change upon it --
their lords, and thwack their palms together;
their masters' berries undetected
the iron figure3 on the table,
their southward flight: one saw approaching
their table, and their hours of leisure?
Their talk, so sound on every matter,
their tendency to call, and sit.
their unattractive t&ecirc;te-&agrave;-t&ecirc;te;
the jagged flint's pulled back anew.
the jams appear in little dishes;
The jealous poet's gloom is lightened!
the joys of youth, that festal cup,
the jug of bilberry wine is seen.1
the keys that opened up the hall.
The kinsfolk in concerted action
the kiss where youth and freshness gleam;
the ladies' calculated dress;
The lady of the house has fled.
The Larins kept the old tradition:
the latest fashions of the town;
the laurel in the old man's crown!
the leather rein, to learn the tale,
the legatee of his relations --
the letter from Tatyana's hand:
the letter trembles in her grip;
the level tenor of his going,
the lies that in the press run rife,
the linen stretched on the tambour.
the logs; the wild ones have the floor;
''The Lord God be with you, my daughter!''
the Lord have mercy on us all!
the lover of Julie Wolmar,3
the lucky bard, and as he dozed
the lust for blood drew them apart?
the magic voices of your stream,
the maidens all are slumbering deep.
''the mail explains the time he's taking.''
the Major's here: he's all the rage
the man of honour and of sense.
the man of reverie and reflection,
The manor house, in deep seclusion,
''The man's a boor; his brain is missing,
the man she feared and idolized --
the man who laid her brother low.
the marriage plans were all exact
the matchwood chatters as it lights.
the meaning of an epigraph,
the men confront them, face to face:
the merchant's up, the cabman's walking
themes popular or idealistic,
the millions of two-legged creation
the moderns rage against the old.
the modesty of her condition,
the modish Record Office clerks
the moon; but in the darkened glass
the moon in its azure of air.
the morning after, a surprise
the morning light no longer lingers,
''The morning star will soon be shining,
the mountain maiden,19 my ideal,
the murmuring Nereids recite,
the murmur where the streamlet played...
the Muses' lofty arts and fashions,
Then, after midday he'll be waking;
then afterwards, alone, at ease,
then, country evening fast arriving,
Then, crying, they untwined my plait,
Then doors are opened, Lensky enters,
then dress...
the needle, never had she lingered
the neighbour... you must tell the brat
The nervous-tragical reaction,
the new ballet he should be at.
the new moon, horned, on her left side,
then from his cabinet he'll pass
then from the Muse there came revival:
Then gradually upon sensation,
then he began to talk once more
then he'd implore a declaration,
then, help me God, she caterwauls:
then he presents her with the scroll.
then I'd have looked for you alone
The night has many stars that glitter,
the nightingale's begun to sing.
the nightly luminaries climb.
Then in return for all this twaddle,
''Then, in the backwoods, far from rumour
then in the study's quiet setting,
then know that your reproving finger,
then later slyly he'd revile them
then Lensky moved his pawn, and took,
then liking grew, then every day
then night comes on; the moon's patrolling
the noise their rustic wheels projected --
then, on the last page, the suggestion:
then on the leaves of recollection,
The north wind blows, the clouds are driving --
Then our Automedons are flashing,
Then, plunged in the housekeeper's day,
then quickly something changed all this:
then quietly at last says she:
''Then send your grandson with this letter
then, stepping nearer, Eugene said:
then sudden fear attacked Tatyana...
then suddenly she's off, and there
Then Tanya hears of the decision.
then to the altar, to be crowned.
Then verdicts from her husband's quartet
Then what resulted from the meeting?
Then with a half-ethereal splendour,
the occupations of the morning.
the odious bear still grunts and lumbers.
The old dame had no thought of scouring
the old dame wept her daughter's parting,
The olden days, I want to hear...''
the one who killed the youthful poet?''
''The one you love's the younger daughter?''
the only face to shake and pass
the other, jugs of applejack,
the pages of some dull review,
the pain, the grief, the marrow-freezing
the pangs with which his heart was troubled,
the party waits. Seized with an illness
the peaceful Muses' devotee,
''The peasants there have wealth abounding,
the pensive Dryads' hiding-ground.
the pillars of the turnpike-gate;
The place where Eugene loathed his leisure
The ploughman there delights to doze,
The poet's dead... already though
the poet's heart found full expression,
the poet's only theme is ''I.''
the poet struck down by his friend!
the potholes make the coach unsteady.
the prejudices of the ages,
the prince bring up his own relation
the prince looks at him, and replies:
The princess, sitting peaked and wan,
the programme of his daily round.
The protocol is all one wishes:
the quintessential reaction
(the reader thinks the rhyme is lilies:
there any friend of harmless pleasure
There came a murmur, for a fleeting
there caustic Shakhovsk&oacute;y8 came in
there Didelot10 crowned himself with glory:
there gathered at the coffin-side
the regimental band is coming,
''There, just in front of all that swarm,
there'll be a fight. For that I give
There many pages keep the impression
there never fails a kindly greeting,
There once I too strolled back and forth:
there's a small window shining in it,
there's crashing, rumbling, pounding, trotting,
There's din of parting now that rages,
there's far too much of contradiction,
There sings the nightingale, spring's lover,
there's no absurdity as such,
there's no ignoble tale that seems
there's not a word she's understood;
there's nothing can employ her anguish,
There's powdery snow up to her knees;
There's vacancies in plenty there.''
there's yap of pugs, and laughs, and bustle;
There too, he honoured, hotly weeping,
there waited for us both the malice
there was a general furtive chatter,
There was a period when cold-blooded
There was a pine-branch downward straying
there was a softness in his glance:
there was no trace to be detected
There was - --,10 so notorious
there, where the coulisse entrance went,
There, with epigrammatic neatness,
There you're entirely sure of finding
there сzerov8 shared the unwilling
the ring of marriageable girls --
the rogue has got a finger frozen:
the rosy bloom that glowed so newly
the rosy sealing-wafer's drying
the roundest face that you've set eyes on,
the Russian for le comme il faut.
the Russian N, like N in French;
The rustic sage, in that apartment,
the sad beginnings of his life
the safest place for declarations,
the same as any other day.
the samovar of evening boiled,
the season which is such a bore --
the secret of her husband's measure,
the secrets of the grave, the pages
These days I'm finding even gladness,
These figures from the world of seeming,
these words are not of Russian stock:
the shades of night within their keeping
the shady wood, the talking stream;
the shepherd, as he used to do,
the shepherd sings of Volga's fishing
the silence when our talk had ceased!
the simple faith of olden days
the simple legend - then a haze
the skyblue eyes, the flaxen tresses,
The sky breathed autumn, time was flowing,
the sky is brilliant in its blue
The sky is clear, the earth is frozen;
the snow from all surrounding hills;
the sober head, detesting each
the solitude of woods and tillage,
The Song of the Girls
the source's chattering voice is heard;
the spring invites you to the land
the spring of honour, and the pin
the stars, the moon - celestial light
The storm is over,5 dawn is paling,
the strain of Tasso's octave-rhyme!
the strangeness of her habitation,
the strophe over which I slaved;
the subtle spouse was just as loyal --
the sufferings of tempestuous passion;
the sumptuous palais shines out;
the swarm, the glittering mob that presses,
the talk of guests when they appear;
the tears in stream pour down her cheeks.
the third day, wood and hill and grazing
the thirst for work, the lust for learning,
the thought of volatile renown.
the thought sank in, and penetrated:
the thoughts of my two anchorites.
the threshold's thronged, wet-nurses call,
the tighter we can stretch above them
the time to go has long since passed
the tolerant Evgeny heard --
the toll of those borne off by fate!
The tomcat, mannered and affected,
the tongue of love and of Petrarch.
the total ownership of woods,
the towers of whitestone Moscow beaming
the trail the youthful poet followed
the tusks, the corpse's finger-nails,
the two foes stand with eyes downcast.
The two old ladies kiss and cry;
the uncertainties within his heart;
the units are ourselves alone.
the universe is all perfection;
the unmetric verses of tradition
the untiring city, where you've given
the unworthy husband through depressing
the urn of perfumed tea, and tipping
the usurers' voracious tribe.
the utter virtue of their being,
the vales dry out, grow brightly printed;
the valley's dark. The forest lands
the vital force gives them the shoot
The vote was passed without demur.
the war, the snowfall, and his wife.
the whole thieves' kitchen flies asunder,
the wild rose blooms, and in the covert
the wilful fancies of the heart.
the wine-addict adores the cup:
the winter's ways are smooth as glass.
the world and all its works, she wept
The World found this enough to treat
The world of fashion, prone to flatter,
the world's &eacute;clat, its thunder-roll,
they all have richly earned a pension;''
they all have swarmed into the hall,
they all still keep their old impress:
The yard was bursting with dependants;
they buried Uncle, congregated
They buzz - but then all talk's suspended --
they'd just enrage it with their dart.
they don't deserve what they inspire
they'd settled that some years before.
the year, his age, then: ''may your rest,
The years incline to gloom and prosing,
The years would pass; no longer youthful,
they find her somewhat unexpected,
they fluff her curls out in the fashion,
they heap up silver with a spade;
they kill the zest of rhymed composing,
They laugh. The guests begin arriving.
they leave their shores and fly away.
they managed to disperse the pack.
they met on horseback; quickly they
they needed kvas like air; at table
they nudged Tatyana, and each muttered
the young hostess, towards whom each
the youthful lover once again
the youthful votary of rhyme
the youth of those past days in line
they praise the Father of the world.
they're all chained up in different fetters,
they're on the dance-floor, waltzing, spinning.
they're plunging, whirling, all but squatting.
They're settled in; and crawling, sliding,
they rise and ripen and fall dead:
they shared their days in deed and heart,
They should be forced to read in Russian,
they shove each plate, and every chair,
They sing; unmoved by their sweet-sounding
they sit, they cross themselves for grace.
They take her too to the Assembly.
they talk of her, of how and whether:
they took offence at this, and broke
They've missed Eugene's completed etching.
they've moved around and been reseated;
they were her only food... and so
they while away the morning's calm.
They will receive us with delight.''
thickly the exclamations fly.
thinking: he loved me, and in strife
thirty-two steps with great precision,
this angel, this proud devil, tell,
this child of luxury and delight.
This dear, still world I must forswear
this denizen of the coulisses
this Grandison of hers was splendid,
''this is the one!'' Ah, ever stronger,
''This is Vladimir Lensky's grave
this modish whirl, this social story,
this soul that glowed with virgin fire.
''This time I think you've been reduced to
this very day I'd gladly give,
this was our heroes' conversation
this was the science of that passion
This wearisome perambulation
This work of the profoundest learning
This world's so vacuous that it's got
Those friends, those friends! it is, I fear,
those monkeys of the good old days:
those walks amid the gloom and calm
those words where love, without condition,
Though belles had lost his adoration,
though cold I am and sad; in sleep
though he's unknown, there's no suggestion
though I'll come back to him, yet clearly
Though long since Eugene's disapproval
though Menelaus, in Helen's name,
though some support it with good grace).
thought, day and night, and thought again
though there he's no more to be found,
thoughts of a girl, or as the moon
thought them a pointless peccadillo;
though we... don't shine in any way,
though what's romantic here I simply
though years ago I used to look
thou, my Svetlana!
threats, vows, and simulated fears,
three carts - traditional procession --
three pairs of handsome ones - yet there
Three whole hours, at the least accounting,
threw Eugene at her feet - she stirred,
thrives to this moment, in a station
Thronged by adorers, I've detected
through baseness of the soul that he,
through distant regions of the heart...
through gloom and mist; and there came streaming
through heaven's expanse serenely flying,
through him is sweetness' self. In grumbling
through it they're known to me, and kin.
throughout the boredom of the hours --
Throughout their life, so calm, so peaceful,
through the back porch runs out and flies
Through the tight ranks - aristocratic,
throw meadows into muddy rout,
thumps as the balls are pressed inside
till he at last was summoned down
till Moscow, meekly on its knees,
till now our language - proud, God knows --
till then had been dispersed and wasted --
Time races, and she's been forgetting
times were when I was sharp and bold:
times were, when master's least suggestion...''
Time was, he'd been the wittiest ever,
time was, in evening hours of leisure,
time was when morning's breeze was swaying
to aim, at steady, even pace
to all that's trivial and inane?
to all the most adored actrices,
to all this tattle, yet at heart
to ask of you that you transcend
to a soir&eacute;e. ''My God! to her!...
to A&yuml;'s vintage in the sequel
To batten down their indignation
to battle further with my passion;
To be a butt for the malicious
to bee and butterfly unknown.
to bellow out: ''she's mine, she's mine.''
to be respected all through life:
to be the bride I'd call my own.
to blow his brains out, but in stead
to boom, to flash across the sky,
to bring across Lepage's4 mortal
to burn - and then by force of reason
to captivate, and then to fly.
to catch the eye and to attract.
to clasp your knees, and at your feet
to come back to the hall alone
to comfort her in all her woes,
to cool my glances and my tongue,
to crack between them; for a while
Today a mental fog enwraps us,
''Today he promised he'd be here,''
Today it's turn and turn about.
Today... the sad memorial's lonely,
to demonstrate some signs of reason:
to do them all is easy game.
to drain its beaker down, nor thought
to drain, on credit, bottles three.
to draw a breath, around her staring
to dreaming given up unduly,
to drive the swooning senses mad;
to drop all that old-fashioned mumming;
to drown the hiss of modish wives.
to each and every raving feast
to eat and drink, then separated
to encase herself inside a layer
to ensure that till next time our image
to Eugene all was new and thrilling;
to Eugene; nineteen to the dozen,
to Eugene's letter, word for word.
to Evgeny. Oh, God, she'd never...
to expose to Moscow fops and Circes
to face him now I feel too frail...
To face society's derision
to fashion's absolute dictate,
to feasts and fun this winter past;
to freedom, softness and enjoyment:
to fresh grandparents every day.
to garden walks, as arm in arm
to gasp, and on a bench to sink.
to gentlemen on every side
together they arrived, and none
to give you honest explanation.
to happen long ago, dear readers,
To harmless idleness devoted,
to hear him howl: ''that's me!'' You'll get
to heart. And in his misted gaze
to hear what latest modes require,
to help her from the other side;
to her flower-garden, to her novels, --
to her glass porch; pursues her round
to hide a hope, to make a show
to high renown my doleful story,
to his disputing and his cursing;
to his mysterious tree the snake
to his Tatyana, yes, he's racing,
to hit the target: thigh or brain.
to hope that even once a week
to horror-stories told at night
to infuriate a clumsy foe;
to institute a new regime.
to it the people's blessing never
to kiss Armida's lips, or seek
to kissing or caressing father
to know the audience hears his voice.
to know you, swooned, and in a second
''To...?'' ''Larina.'' ''Tatyana? never!''
to lie down at her feet like slaves!
to life and hope with just a glance --
to life grew colder than the dead.
to lift her skirt up; still she's flying,
to lift his pistol up. A span
To live, it hurries, and to feel it hastes.
to liven with a silk atour
to look like sad romanticism.
to meet a black monk, or if crossing
to meet his thirsty lips... What daze,
to meet the unhappy poet, skipped
to me her best in-quarto tome,
''To me, Onegin, all this glory
to me so simply, with the fires
To me, unsmiling lips bring terror,
tomorrow just like yesterday.
to Moscow settled in a trice.
to mourn for Russia's gloomy savour,
To my astonishment I've seen her,
to my young days, it's time I turned
to nobody except a wizened
too faint to stir a further pace:
took her to his estate, where she,
to Olga's face, he whispered low
too long, against my inclination,
too long he's hoaxed us high and low...''
too pale, too thin, but on the whole
too weak to change, I'm staying vicious,
to pass for an affected freak,
to pass for cultured in our ranks.
to pass the evening. No? then tot
to pass the time was Eugene's theme:
To Peter Alexandrovich Pletnev
to pine away from passion's thirst,
to play with a dishevelled tress,
to pranks and jokes of earlier date.
To private tastes we each subscribe:
to put on chains for him, and steady
to puzzle out with some precision
to rains, and flax, and the stockyard.''
to raise the safety catch and strain
To reading from this odd collection
to reasoned talk, no dull hearsay,
torment of pride? And why's he come?
to roar of banquets, din of brawling,
to save the honour of our land
to scorn the men with whom he deals;
to see life as a ritual play,
to see my kin, and in the end
to see the grave, and shed a tear.
to see you, faithfully to follow,
to sing of others must imply
to sleep some black and empty dreams;
to smother her dear feet with kissing.
to sob out prayer, complaint, confession,
to speak; believe me: of my shame
to spoil loose paper by the ream;
to steal away her neighbour's light
to stem the bloodstream's wild outburst;
to tales that young moustachios tell.
to talk as if with heart unwrung,
to talk of this and that, but then
To talk, to general conversation
to talk to her, but language died.
to Tanya, all's an empty show.
to the beginning of our days.
to the circle of our dance.
to the complacent and the null;
to the empty homestead made her way,
to the first meanings of his flute.
to the hero that she'd adopted.
to the Larins' had caused a spout
to the princess, in his weak hand,
touches her hand, or throws a fur
touches obliquely, but with speed,
to undertake their resurrection,
to us, though, not exactly new.
to vice, while virtue got its crown.
towards his stall, the pedlar's hawking;
towards the Larins' and arriving
towards the simple urn beneath;
toward the neighbouring valley's river.
to wave farewell the household waits
to where he came to her that time
to which so oft we've dedicated
to whisper it her inmost prayer.
To whom do you, from all the train
to whom, in a fine flow of preaching,
to whom your hearts are dedicated,
to wiser words and deeds, and learned
to wreak, by stirring Lensky's ire,
to wreck a maiden's sleep with fable,
to your loved ones? They do maintain
tracked him, and put him in duress,
tradition still keeps my respect.
tranquillity, and solitude --
tread the calm, settled path they've chosen...
treated his lessons as a ploy.
treaties of nations long departed,
tribute of tears, applause's shrilling,
tries out the ice with cautious tread,
Triquet, ingenious poet, dares
Triquet sings, out of tune. Loud clapping
True, scorn should punish and should bridle
true, with a pistol he could shatter
trusted her without hesitation,
Tsimlyansky wine, between the meat
tumbled and whirled and twisted quaintly
twin lamps of serried coup&eacute;s throw
twirls the other slowly as she pleases,
two cupboards, one divan, a table,
two hearts, a torch, and a nosegay;
Two hearts there are perhaps that keep
two or three novels where our later
two pines have tangled at the root;
two poles that ice had glued like plaster
two sisters who'd received the initial,9
two verses of the Aeneid.
Two weeks the matchmaker was plying
unanimous exchange of looks
Uncle, in bed, and near to dying,
unconsciously he let it mount
under the table's linen shield,
undressed, by candlelight selected
unfathomable to the mind;
Unforced, as conversation passed,
unhesitating from her tongue,
unloved, and friendless, and estranged.
unnoticed, in unseeing style,
unseen, already you were dear,
unspeaking, too, but stretched out there
unswerving friend, correct landowner,
until Br&eacute;guet's unsleeping chime
until the dawn beneath her pillow.
until the grave by your strong hand:
until the tombstone; there one day
until this day, a lady's love
untirable, at sound of drum:
untouched by envy's bitter smarting,
untouched by trace of inhibition,
upon her feverish tongue; the slip
upon her lips the breathing dies,
upon it, and with head down-bent
upon the side of the distaff --
up the hillside at breakneck pace;
Up to the porch our hero's driven:
up your accounts, and raging, toping,
urbane betrayals, and the chilling
use cunning silence as a screen,
used in times past to ring a peal
using overt or covert rules.
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
(vain twaddle, fables of the ages,
value the hero of my tale,
vanishes with his load of dread.
verdicts of vanity the bleak,
Vesper is met by crow of cock --
vexation? vainness? heavens above,
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VII
VII
VII
VII
VII
VII
VII
VIII
VIII
VIII
VIII
VIII
VIII
VIII
(VIII,2 IX,) X
villages flickered far and near,
visit the family, what d'you say?
Vladimir drops, hand softly sliding
Vladimir Lensky. Quick, let's dine!
Vladimir Lensky, whose creator
Vladimir's challenge found expression
Vladimir shuts the book, for writing
Vladimir to this casual mention
Vladimir, wealthy and good-looking,
''Wait, I'll present you - but you banish
wakened at the same hour of night
walked homeward round the kitchen garden;
Walking her horse in introspection
Walking? The country that you roam
wanders in a distracted way
was an enchanting country nook:
was asked around as quite a catch --
was brought there by a huckster who
was by forebodings much oppressed.
was far from happy with his role.
was finding leisure's vacuum cruel;
was G&ouml;ttingen, his alma mater,
was his absorption in their sense.
was his; we'd both drunk passion's chalice:
Was it for you that I became
Was it not in such sweet employment
was it not you, dear apparition,
Was it to no effect that he,
was just created for the part.
was one who raged and raged again,
was quite beyond his wit, we found.
Was she the Tanya he'd exhorted
was still mysterious and enticing --
was stripped away, and mists encroaching
was that calm brow of one who swooned.
was the first thing that Olga said.
was the sad poet not confounded
was undiscovered to that day.
was younger still, but at that stage
watched sun and clock - then by such labours
watch for your smile, and catch your gaze
watch the games we maidens play.''
We all meandered through our schooling
We all resemble more or less
we'd better hasten to the ball,
wedlock for us would be abhorrent.
We each enjoy a special hobby,
We each have enemies in this world,
we have to cherish and admire
we'll draw it deeper in our net;
we'll go with her to that delicious
Well, I must make a frank confession,
''Well, I won't hold you up or bore you;
we'll keep love's price appreciating,
we'll talk, and talk, and then we'll show
''Well, what?'' the neighbour says, ''he's killed.''
Weltered in tears, and sorely smarting,
We must confess that taste deserts us
were all the law that I would use;
were chanted, I remember when --
were from his vision quite withdrawn.
were picking berries from the bough,
were placed across the gulf to make
were served in order of their rank.
were you in love when you were young?''
we sometimes like to hear again
We too shall find our hour is waiting;
We've many neighbours round about;
we visit them, or without fail
we weep for the young lover's end,
we were swept off, in reverie's haze,
What ails him? he's in some strange daze!
What breasts! What soul!... We'll go one day
what came from this unlooked-for meeting;
what can one do? as said above,
What cause has won me your attention?
What do I want? what am I after,
what dream accounts for her distraction?
What else? Quite drunk with love's illusion,
Whatever for caprice of spending
Whatever in this rough confection
whatever you may need, just call...
What fate is my tomorrow brewing?
what feelings would assume control
what flowers of spring display your dint?
What folly! and what retribution!
''What, Grandison? oh, Grandison!
What happened? Though his eyes were reading,
what have your wits to do with me?
what held me was my predilection,
what holds her in profound reflection,
What if your pistol-shot has smitten
''What in the world is more distressing
What? Invitations? Yes, three houses
what is he? Just an apparition,
what it's transported to our shore
what kind of thought, what observation,
what London calls, with humble duty
what moves along the hidden ways
''What nonsense, Tanya! in those other
what occupied his chafing powers
what odes Vladimir might have written --
What of it? it's euphonious, pleasant,
What of it? Nothing. I'm just sending
''What of them, Tanya? I was able,
what play will he present this week?
What power enslaves you, with your seeming
What scorn I see in the expression
what's in them? All this loud parading,
what's more, I loved you; but my hunger,
What sort of roses, in your notion,
what store of riches it imparts!
what traps he'd set him, with what malice
What trifling could be more complete?
what was it in your heart it found
what wings our first successes gave!
when Br&eacute;guet's chime is heard proclaiming
When comes my moment to untether?
When Eugene's turn for salutation
Whenever nyanya had collected
when, from behind the doorway, hidden
when galloping at headlong pace
when he arrived; not in the slightest:
when hourly we ourselves betrayed it,
When I defected from their union
when, in pale sky, the stars' procession
when in the park, in the all&eacute;e
when little notes come on a tray.
when night patrol's a perilous calling;
when not quite eighteen years of age.
when, on the plain, green herbs are massed,
when our sublimest aspiration,
when our Zaretsky met his eyes.
When out to burst a rival's bubble,
When progress and amelioration
when shall I start on my escape?
when suddenly I saw this treasure
when, utterly worn out by rhyming,
when we begin to talk of verse);
When we draw a fellow in,
when we see him from afar,
When we've retreated to the banner
"When will the devil come for you?"
where admonitions are pronounced,
where are distress, commiseration?
where are the reveries this time,
Where are you? come - and my own right
where a sharp nail has made a dent.
where can we find your equal?
where civil treacheries are rife,
where did that glum eccentric go,
where dwelt this child of inspiration,
where every day a bloodstained shade
where fate had fixed our confrontation,
where flows a little glittering brook,
where folded arms are tightly pressed.
where her security's complete.
where he was master of his college,
where, in a cab, and furious hurry,
where in the heart of silence rang
Where is the fire that once ignited,
''where master used to sit alone.
where nowadays I'm soundly trounced,
where scribbling friends have interjected
where shall he go, my rogue, my hearty?
where (standard rhyme) are youth and fleetness?
where's the high aim, the ardent sense
where Tanya now confronts Eugene.
where the prize-boy of fashion's college
Where to, God knows. The trail is dead.
where two old pinetrees stand united:
where you were born as well, I think,
whether from heaven or from hell,
whether it goes careering past,
Whether the arrow has my number,
which has recalled, without precision,
which held him silently subjected,
which I myself won't praise or blame
which, listening with some condescension,
''Which neighbour, dear? My head became
Which one comes first? It's just the same
which Ovid sang, for which the bard,
which smilingly your friend, supported
which with a blush he leaves unread.
while a mazurka holds the crowd;
while dear Tatyana's youth grows dimmer:
while floors would split from crash of heel,
while in the hut a girl is singing;
While Lensky'd long been meditating
while, marmot-like, he hibernated --
while men, all sombre, all the same,
while odes have high and noble aims...''
while Petersburg's already rousing,
while roar of violins contrives
while serious topics were disputing,
while she's from top to toe surveyed;
While under the connubial banner
whispered by heart a note addressed
whisper of breeze announces morning,
whisper repeated to the crone.
whispers some ballad of the hour,
whither does all my yearning tend?
''Whither, oh whither are ye banished,
who all his life would garner praise
who can combine it with the free
Who could have looked the poet better,
who'd sit, and at the end of play
who early died as die the brave'' --
who else? - the hero of our novel!
whoever you may be, a friend,
who, in good time, would calmly get
Who in that flash could not have reckoned
who in the country spends her summer,
who in the dark came flashing through
Who in the princess for that second
Who is there who will truly measure
who late at night are whirled away
who'll clap an entrechat, or scoff
Who'll never fault our vices, or
Who'll sow no calumnies around us?
''who loves you more than I, let's see
whom shall we never find a bore?
Whom then to credit? Whom to treasure?
whom thirty centuries have adored!
who never learnt how dreamers babble;
who never scorned the social rabble;
who on a deuce, that famous cheat,
Who on earth is he? not... our hero?
Whose fond attentions will astound us?
''Whose glance, provoking inspiration,
whose heart experience has cooled
whose heart on dreams was wont to thrive,
whose kindly hand will ruffle down
whose memory will preserve for me
whose serfs are miserably thin;
who sets me snoring then and there --
Who's not disgusted by cajoling,
who swaggers in with the reply.
Who taught her all this mad, slapdash,
Who taught her an address so tender,
''Who? that fat general?'' Tanya cried.
who walks with sorrow, and with danger,
who was it that you dreamt about?''
''Who would have thought it?'' ''What an age!''
why, at the thought, my husband's mother
''Why did you visit us, but why?
why fight what's known to be decisive?
Why have you gone all pale and queasy?''
Why is Tatyana guiltier-seeming?
''Why not?'' ''I'd choose the other quarter
''why, Olga's younger, and she's bedded.
Why, pretty one, you're up already!
''Why, Tanya, what...?'' ''All's dull and trifling.
Why then do you pursue me now?
wild as a forest deer, and fearful,
Wildly the fearful laughter pealed;
will anger you in its confession.
will blossom into splendid highways:
will disappear as fast as smoke:
will find the ice elude his grip
will give you a complete reply.
will halt her horse and, gripping tightly
will in a flash decide his lot.
will in my soul be hushed and dying.
will loyally discharge its duties,
will reach, and past the tomb's compound
will the benighted reason smile,
wine of the Comet6 fills the cup;
Winter!... The countryman, enchanted,
wished him to come and say farewell.
wishes his madness to the devil,
with a blunt cue for the duration,
with a consumption, they've relied.
with a first click, the catch is tried.
with all our hearts, and who require
with amber pipes from Tsaregrad;12
with an avowal just as artless;
with an obeisance I'll hand over...
with any torture so exquisite
with a quick look perusing lightly
With a sharp epigram it's pleasant
with a small tray and a teacup.
with a Venetian maiden who
with balm of prayer my torn and rended
with bended knees a windmill dances,
with brilliant conquests by the shower,
with broods of children of all ages,
with bursts of passion from the heart,
with careful schemes of decoration
with care Zaretsky stows away
with cause that I've recalled them here.
with censure - I've done all to earn it!
with charming forefinger she traced
with combs, and steel utensils serving
with comedies of swarm and din;
with cranium aching fit to split;
with custom, love would fade away;
with deeds; that dunces now and then
with deep emotion looks about
with deep emotion through and through,
with demoiselles of riper age;
with draughts from love's enticing flask,
with each nuance of wintry glow:
with Eugene frozen where he stood.
with Eugene proved a tempting prize.
with every different kind of rabble...''
with every sort of home possession:
with eyes aflame Onegin rises
with eyes of love, with greed to swallow
with fire from every cross of gold.
with fond caress? whose adoration
with foppery and too much starch,
with fright, she hears the approaching bear;
with gown and slippers; tearing hurry,
with grave goodbyes to the bereaved,
with Guillot; while pourparlers last
with heart that's grown unused to praise,
with her own forests and her meads...
with his forefathers would seem better;
within her bosom to abate,
with irresistible refulgence,
with jealousy beyond all measure
with lampions studded all about
with lies and jokes that packed a punch:
with lines to mark where they were sleeping...
with lively and pellucid look,
with love and comfort in your meaning,
with me to see an alien strand;
With mounts from home, or postal station,
with mournful sound the secret shade
with neighbour Lensky, the deceased.
with old Anisia. The next day
with Olga, all have pierced her soul;
with our Mamas, and a sensation
with our poor girl was kind and good;
without a goal on which to fix,
without an elegiac frill,
without a trace of spite or plot,
without a word Tatyana leant
without preliminary feeler
Without romance, or false insistence,
without surprise or rage... his laden,
with parks and mansions, open up.
with passion and with shrewd obliqueness
with perturbation and with worry;
with pleasure on his vengeful act.
with pots and basins out of mind,
with puzzled and confused regard...
With reason, too: for when he'd vetted
with recent fortune, vainly waited
with sabre's slash, and bullet's blast.
with scorn to make my world a hell.
with sheer enchantment fills her cup!
with shelves of books deployed for action,
with sighs unconsciously regretful.
With spelling scrambled to perdition,
with spinning noise and senseless flashing
with storm and tumult in his head,
with such a blissful, brief infection --
with tears, in quarters of the maids:
with tenderness he'd watched and noted
With that, in tears, and quite worn out,
with the grand general in her wake --
with the pink glow the snows assume
with the resounding chime of glass.
with the unmistakeable sideview
with The Well-Meaner10 on her knee?
with this the hero of my tale:
with thoughts of him in ceaseless round.
with three roan horses in a line
with Tolstoy's2 brush, or decorated
with trees decked in their silvery kit,
with tufts of snow; and through the lifted
with visions of enchanted night,
with whom your thoughts are so obsessed --
With womankind, the less we love them,
with work at home; but when he'd gone,
with years no more to meet our gaze?
with young Semy&oacute;nova,9 and there
with your good offices, and so
won't benefit these guts of mine.''
won't even cross their minds by stealth...
word on his lips, and thought: it's sheer
words mispronounced, thoughts ill-expressed
works where contemporary man
Worse luck, Larina crawled; the employment
worthier of you in the perfection
would be allied to him by fate;
would bless the form his fortune took.
would cause widespread remark and tattle,
would fill Tatyana from afar
would have been all that we required!
would have been spared this laceration.
would have divined the tender, shrinking
would Hymen bring us - blooms that might
would launch into self-sacrifice;
would leave her dithering and tossing.
would not have recognized again
would on those evenings guess the fate
would say goodbye and drive away,
would settle, on the morrow morning,
would talk, keep silent, laugh, then frown --
wound that had seared my Tanya's heart!
wronged always in disgraceful fashion --
X
X
X
X
X
X
XI
XI
XI
XI
XI
XI
XI
XI
XII
XII
XII
XII
XII
XII
XII
XII
XIII
XIII
XIII
XIII
XIII
XIII
XIII
(XIII, XIV,) XV
XIV
XIV
XIV
XIV
XIV
XIV
XIV
XIX
XIX
XIX
XIX
XIX
XIX
XIX
XIX
XL
XL
XL
XL
XL
XL
XLI
XLI
XLI
XLI
XLI
XLI
XLII
XLII
XLII
XLII
XLII
XLIII
XLIII
XLIII
XLIII
XLIII
XLIII7
XLIV
XLIV
XLIV
XLIV
XLIV
XLIV
XLIX
XLIX
XLIX
XLIX
XLV
XLV
XLV
XLV
XLV
XLV
XLVI
XLVI
XLVI
XLVI
XLVI
XLVII
XLVII
XLVII
XLVII
XLVII
XLVIII
XLVIII
XLVIII
XLVIII
XV
XV
XV
XV
XV
XV
XVI
XVI
XVI
XVI
XVI
XVI
XVI
XVII
XVII
XVII
XVII
XVII
XVII
XVII
XVIII
XVIII
XVIII
XVIII
XVIII
XVIII
XVIII
XVIII
(XV, XVI,2) XVII
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XXI
XXI
XXI
XXI
XXI
XXI
XXI
XXI
XXII
XXII
XXII
XXII
XXII
XXII
XXII
XXII
XXIII
XXIII
XXIII
XXIII
XXIII
XXIII
XXIII
XXIII
XXIV
XXIV
XXIV
XXIV
XXIV
XXIV
XXIV
XXIV
XXIX
XXIX
XXIX
XXIX
XXIX
XXIX
XXIX
XXIX
XXV
XXV
XXV
XXV
XXV
XXV
XXV
XXV
XXVI
XXVI
XXVI
XXVI
XXVI
XXVI
XXVI
XXVI
XXVII
XXVII
XXVII
XXVII
XXVII
XXVII
XXVII
XXVII
XXVIII
XXVIII
XXVIII
XXVIII
XXVIII
XXVIII
XXVIII
XXVIII
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXXI
XXXI
XXXI
XXXI
XXXI
XXXI
XXXI
XXXI
XXXII
XXXII
XXXII
XXXII
XXXII
XXXII
XXXII
XXXII
XXXIII
XXXIII
XXXIII
XXXIII
XXXIII
XXXIII
XXXIII
XXXIII
XXXIV
XXXIV
XXXIV
XXXIV
XXXIV
XXXIV
XXXIV
XXXIV
XXXIX
XXXIX
XXXIX
XXXIX
(XXXIX,2) XL
(XXXIX, XL, XLI,) XLII
XXXV
XXXV
XXXV
XXXV
XXXV
XXXV
XXXV
XXXV
XXXVI
XXXVI
XXXVI
XXXVI
XXXVI
XXXVI
XXXVI
XXXVII
XXXVII
XXXVII
XXXVII
XXXVII
XXXVII
XXXVII
XXXVIII
XXXVIII
XXXVIII
XXXVIII
XXXVIII
XXXVIII
(XXXVIII,2) XXXIX
(XXXVIII) XXXIX
XXXVI6
years back, to call up many a fable;
yes, even there its triumph grows.
yes, focus on them your lorgnette,
yes, in that spring-time, in low-lying
Yes, spleen was waiting like a sentry,
yes, these were our forefathers' ways,
Yes, youth divines, in giddy madness,
yet a capricious inclination,
yet, as each rule has its exception,
yet dared not trust what I could see.
Yet - fear itself she found presented
yet floods of talk around the town...
yet he'd back you through thick and thin:
yet he fell out of love at last
Yet hissing froth deals a malicious,
yet how I wish that I might raise
Yet once for him her thoughts had whirled,
yet people's malice and suspicion
Yet sweeter far, at such a time,
Yet Tanya's note made its impression
Yet the mazurka keeps today
yet, truthfully and not in chaff,
you acted well, that dread occasion,
you age, and life's just grief and sadness...''
you called there twice, and since then took
''You criticize Moscow? why make such a fuss
you'd made appearance in my dreaming;
You'd never class her as a beauty;
you'd not so much as know the name,
''You don't see what to do? that's funny:
you drink the magic draught of yearning,
you find the country godforsaken;
you gave me such a shocking fright!
you help him to an honoured fate
You husbands, deeply I respect you!
you in my arms on gingerbread?''
you kept your friendship with our friend:
''You know him, do you?'' ''Yes and no.''
you know I'm hard to comprehend...
''You know, it's true, how I attended,
you learn life's sweetness, and with this
you left no steps that could be tracked:
You'll love again, but you must teach
you'll never leave me to my fate.
you'll read: here's Pradt,7 here's Walter Scott!
you'll recognize him soon enough, --
you loved the opulent contact
you made me drunk as one could ask!
you newborn work, and like a winner
Young ladies jump for future blisses...
young poet, be for ever blest!''
young Tanya first appeared to me,
young traitresses by the platoon,
you object of my guileless ditties!
''You pile one eclogue on another!
your advent swamps me in its flood!
your battles, lawless and atrocious,
your chorus, is it dead for ever?
your cold discourse, were less unkind --
Your curiosity is burning
your dashing one, is she surviving?''
you're all in fever... heavens above.''
your early life, unlock your tongue:
''You're ill, God have you in his keeping,
''You're married? No idea whatever...
''You're off? why, there's a poet for you!''
you're really going? Well, I'm sad.
you're sure to find her portrait in it:
''You're wrong.'' ''But what I wonder at
your feet, to pale and waste... what rapture!
your grief would fail to touch my heart,
your heart some self-restraint; for each
your heels will squash the ladies' toes! &gt;
your heroes, raging and ferocious,
Your horse, blunt-shoed and all unwary,
your icy look, your stern dissuasion,
your loved one, honourable reader!
your matchlessness, to seek to capture
''Your modish world, I'll do without it;
your molten gold, your charmed infusion;
your night of fretting's left no trace!
your presence aches, and in my blood!
your pride, some answer, or in truth
yourself too long from social life.''
your soul displays, in holy dreams,
your Tanya's image in your mind,
your tears would flow - but your emotion,
your words, and in my soul to explore
your Zeus, your Cypris, your whole band
you see the two in uniform...
you see, with tears and incantation
you see your fated tempter stand.
you sought - tumultuous recollection,
youthful, who ripened in his time,
youth is a fever; we must spare
youth's choice, the flower of French cuisine:
youth which has nothing to regret,
you too have seen on Neva's brink.
you took an honourable part --
You too, mamas, I pray attend it,
You too, prime beauties in your flower
You've guessed before it all began:
you've made so many secret rhymes,
you've paid insanity its due.
you were the first ones he forswore;
you won't find that quite so much catch...
''You wrote to me, and nothing spoken
''You yawn, Onegin?'' ''As I'm used to.''
Zar&eacute;tsky, sometime king of brawls
Zaretsky bit his lip. Eugene
Zaretsky draws up a convention
Zaretsky, engineer-in-waiting,
Zaretsky rose without discussion;
Zaretsky watched, and stood there grinning.
Zhukovsky
Zizi, my crystal and my gem,
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------










---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
dda
have gnawed our bridges, and the flea
diversely urging the same plea,
Moscow, loved daughter of Russia,
O Russia!
Friends of my Ruslan and Lyudmila,
in Adam Smith was his diploma;
I too - when I recall Svetlana5
and melancholy as Svetlana,2
thou, my Svetlana!
then sudden fear attacked Tatyana...
Onegin's Letter to Tatyana
''But tell me, which one was Tatyana?''
''Princess, mon ange!'' ''Pachette!'' ''Alina!''
album and stays, Princess Alina,
''Akulka'' the onetime Selina,
Praskovya re-baptized ''Polina'';
swapped it for odd tomes of Malvina,
''How long can you... ?'' ''Dearest kuzina!''
arch-rake, pothouse tribune-persona,
and, in the district, this persona
a liar still, Lyub&oacute;v Petrovna,
still powdered is Luk&eacute;rya Lvovna,
Diana's breast, the cheeks of Flora,
Idol mio or Benedetta,
Buy&aacute;nov whirls off Pustyakova;
Tatyana on; Miss Kharlikova,
and then old cousin Pelag&eacute;ya
but now my brain is darkened, Tanya:
I'm old, my mind is blunted, Tanya;
''I reckon, by God's will. My Vanya
My mind is fuddled.'' ''Tell me, nyanya,
''How slow you are at guessing, nyanya!''
''How did you come to marry, nyanya?''
ccb
and slowly day begins to climb.
the nightly luminaries climb.
and rest his dear bones in the tomb,
presses its forebears to the tomb.
stands over my poor nurse's tomb.
down in our damp earth-mother's womb!''
but I, in love, was dull and dumb.
Is spleen his trouble, or the dumb
Iv&aacute;n Petr&oacute;vich still is dumb,
bbc
and telling trochee from iambic
He was without that dithyrambic
or for a lamentable manic,
a monster of the gens Satanic,
Remember the retort satiric!
and the deep-throated billows' choric
How oft she'd lead me, by the Tauric
Is Others' View,5 that clever lyric,
military-foppish, diplomatic --
he informed this envoy diplomatic
Eugene's response was automatic;
Through the tight ranks - aristocratic,
she finds, in order alphabetic:
Searching the table exegetic
of spring he lives, he's energetic;
he leaves one morning the hermetic
that world where every man's a critic
But soft! You hear? A scowling critic,
no deathless truths, nothing scholastic;
of unaffectedly fantastic
themes popular or idealistic,
from threads both sad and humoristic,
the elegy, grown paralytic,
boo Phaedra out as paralytic,
aad
Now, Lensky, would it be so bad
The horses, as they sense the dead,
to life grew colder than the dead.
''some are far distant, some are dead''.
of entertaining the half-dead:
they rise and ripen and fall dead:
The happiness of youth is dead,
goes out of us when youth is dead.
Where to, God knows. The trail is dead.
rapture was just two weeks ahead;
the grey-haired nurse with kerchiefed head;
first snow for shoulders, breast and head:
Lel6 floats about above her head;
slumber still floats above his head.
and silently he hung his head.
with storm and tumult in his head,
a single thing to her. His head
talk that might turn a young girl's head)
the ballroom drove me off my head:
on the dull life that bachelors lead;
you in my arms on gingerbread?''
for Tanya, winter's ways are dread.
vanishes with his load of dread.
and kept quite silent while she read.
can disavow that. I have read
in friendly gatherings where I read,
which with a blush he leaves unread.
on which a carpet has been spread,
before the fire a table's spread;
but Olga would have never read!
just like, on turf, your fleeting tread.
and for belle Nina, as it read,
tries out the ice with cautious tread,
others will follow where they tread...
he's put belle Tatiana instead.
but now grown plain and kind in stead,
But that's enough. At once, in stead,
anticipates a swim, in stead
to blow his brains out, but in stead
His wife, just like Tatyana, had
on Richardson gone raving mad.
to drive the swooning senses mad;
with amber pipes from Tsaregrad;12
you're really going? Well, I'm sad.
his transports, and the marriage-bed
and doctors, he'd have died in bed.
one smoothes the pillows down in bed,
Tanya's undressed, and lies in bed.
At last he wakes, and stirs in bed,
Tatyana simply lay in bed,
billiards are dropped, cue put to bed:
on a small bench by Tanya's bed,
beside the window-sill, that bed
in sultry sleep, in lonely bed,
''OE'' devotedly inlaced.
with charming forefinger she traced
take any novel, clearly traced
where admonitions are pronounced,
where nowadays I'm soundly trounced,
At first Onegin's tongue produced
now Lovelace's renown has faded
and heartless pleasure was up-graded;
a stanza villainously padded.
some regimental bard has added
''why, Olga's younger, and she's bedded.
always comes back: I'll not be wedded.
he'd sack the Muses and get wedded;
not for the first time he succeeded
Agree, the way Eugene proceeded
always before the volume ended
the crash of plates and knives is blended
helping the poor, or while I mended
They buzz - but then all talk's suspended --
Should your perfections be expended
with balm of prayer my torn and rended
loved someone else, not her intended,
''But I was simply not intended
Always our fervid hero tended
''You know, it's true, how I attended,
In the two sisters' rooms extended,
amongst the crafty and small-minded,
both dull and ludicrous, the bunded
High ceilings everywhere abounded;
in which so lately it abounded
Poor Lensky! where the tomb is bounded
was the sad poet not confounded
in the saloon, brocade-surrounded,
Here stands, with shady park surrounded,
There was a period when cold-blooded
Her father, kindly, well-regarded,
but in an earlier age retarded,
I'm sick, my dear, I'm sick indeed.
Eugene, with solemn face, paid heed,
had drawn Eugene's especial heed
but you're not paying any heed.''
touches obliquely, but with speed,
is brought to table at full speed.
pursuits of a monotonous breed
the draught whose blessings are agreed,
and where he'd silently agreed.
begot by boredom out of greed.
how long is it?'' ''And since I fed
for his old courses to be changed.
for happiness, I sought, and ranged
and glad he was he'd thus arranged
unloved, and friendless, and estranged.
''Whither, oh whither are ye banished,
Oh, when, and to what desert banished,
My goddesses! Where are you banished?
By chance those verses haven't vanished;
have other maidens, since you vanished,
my little feet, where have you vanished,
in fashion that's half-glad, half-anguished:
that table where the lamp has languished,
midst crones with endless tears to shed,
his nature would be changed and steadied,
to talk to her, but language died.
Lensky, that tragic victim, died...
debauchery was praised, and studied
people there were he glorified,
he's dreadfully dissatisfied;
with a consumption, they've relied.
If suddenly aloft she spied
''Who? that fat general?'' Tanya cried.
of the old Tatyana. Eugene tried
with a first click, the catch is tried.
she lacked her sister's beauty, lacked
Eugene, at Olga's side, was racked
you left no steps that could be tracked:
suggests a victim richly decked...
profoundly sunk, Tatyana stalked
the bear - what next? - behind her stalked.
for hours alone; she walked and walked...
her way; she passed, then as she walked
Wildly the fearful laughter pealed;
monsters the maiden stood revealed.
the impatient conqueror was humbled!
but suddenly a snowdrift rumbled,
but no, my Moscow never stumbled
and what came out? a hairy, tumbled,
fever of rhyme: thereby he's doubled
the pangs with which his heart was troubled,
Meanwhile with pain her soul was girdled,
A sudden clatter!... blood was curdled...
The lady of the house has fled.
another, and his memory's fled
the samovar of evening boiled,
beneath it, vapour wreathed and coiled.
For what charade is he apparelled?
beneath a shroud that's all dishevelled;
the bank, the immobile stream are levelled
enormous bear; Tatyana yelled,
in bed, a young man, stiff and chilled;
Evgeny looks at Lensky, chilled
''Well, what?'' the neighbour says, ''he's killed.''
he hears a voice; ''well, what? he's killed!''
foes, friends and loves, their voice is stilled.
down from his Kalmuck steed he rolled
the eager players are enrolled --
whose heart experience has cooled
and saved from being charmed or fooled!
Yet once for him her thoughts had whirled,
His hair was fashionably curled,
hymnal as, endlessly unfurled,
he found all kinds of brickbat hurled.
could it be she... or had he dreamed?
but just then Eugene's pistol flamed...
the girl he'd scorned in what he deemed
and Lensky, left eye closing, aimed --
he's host, that's obvious. Thus enlightened
The jealous poet's gloom is lightened!
knowing the offender, he'd been frightened
Tanya's no longer quite so frightened
But I myself read my bedizened
to nobody except a wizened
below the others who have signed
approaches Olga; Lensky's signed
her bow, as calm and as restrained.
her manner is no less contained;
he watched the guests and, as he dined,
has something low and unrefined.
her feelings were far more inclined --
For several days she peaked and pined
is in your poetry enshrined?''
sweet words by which her pain was banned --
for whom her passion has been planned
don't let me stray in paths unplanned.''
and pledged to you, and firmly planned:
Who in that flash could not have reckoned
no dream. You'd scarce arrived, I reckoned
I had most surely never reckoned
was that calm brow of one who swooned.
to wiser words and deeds, and learned
away, so cool, so unconcerned?
in quilted dressing-gown adorned,
and in the country, blissful, horned,
could it be she, who just had turned
to my young days, it's time I turned
then to the altar, to be crowned.
had with its brilliant mantle crowned --
in darkest forest depths and drowned
to meet the unhappy poet, skipped
just as she'd always been, she tripped
Tatyana went with them, and sped
and where most surely notes are sped.
her girlhood games; in them he'd shared,
a treasure never to be shared.
as something not to be declared,
at any time he'd be prepared.
on Olga; from heart's ache still spared,
in terms where not a word was spared:
at twenty, was a fop inbred,
Or, as by Lethe's bank he slumbered,
perhaps no more sensations lumbered
how many follies were engendered;
friends, recollect how I surrendered
Her tender touch had never fingered
the needle, never had she lingered
however much her soul has faltered,
and nothing in her look is altered:
no notice of them. But I've chattered
if you come with me, they'll be flattered;
reader, or where you've shone and glittered!
Onegin, my good friend, was littered
that not a syllable be uttered
in these last years all mixed and fluttered.
The aunts exchanged a look, they fluttered,
they nudged Tatyana, and each muttered
I don't mean that she never shivered,
no, even her eyebrow never quivered,
our lives were flat, and what had fired
he almost lost his mind, expired,
both hearts to blaze had now expired;
would have been all that we required!
whom thirty centuries have adored!
far, far from Italy, his adored.
from all the world, they sat and pored
past all endurance. You're referred
and not because she'd once preferred
or half-unwittingly preferred
filled him with thoughts that swarmed and whirred;
in quiet flood. A beetle whirred.
Beyond the stream there smoked and stirred
threw Eugene at her feet - she stirred,
no sound by which her soul is stirred.
on Eugene, he was deeply stirred:
it was that he'd been truly stirred,
deep in Moldavia the abhorred,
that sat above the stove and purred
the silence when our talk had ceased!
with neighbour Lensky, the deceased.
she brought her talents, never ceased,
Like convicts in a dream released
hold half the world still unreleased,
for long... for evermore. We've chased
the earth for him grew dumb and closed?...
in warmer airs was half dispersed.
when, on the plain, green herbs are massed,
the time to go has long since passed
of inexperience would have passed,
Unforced, as conversation passed,
forests where my young age was passed
she's their great friend, asked in, caressed,
whispered by heart a note addressed
is in voluptuous languor dressed,
was by forebodings much oppressed.
words mispronounced, thoughts ill-expressed
her hands affectionately pressed;
where folded arms are tightly pressed.
with whom your thoughts are so obsessed --
Still on the board, the beakers hissed,
no one was ever so engrossed:
struck down as if she'd been accused,
He thought that Olga'd be confused,
a haze in me, but I grew used
to whom your hearts are dedicated,
to which so oft we've dedicated
and Fly&aacute;nov, amply lubricated,
Napoleon here, intoxicated
but for the effect that he created
in darkness in her room, or treated
they've moved around and been reseated;
He's always with her: either seated
The clock of doom had struck as fated;
she fell in love - the hour was fated...
for aeons. Maybe it was fated
they buried Uncle, congregated
its nullity I've always hated,
He was no fool; appreciated
he drives in brilliant sun; striated
That year the season was belated
(as I've so oft in jest related)?
Lensky ingenuously related
by all is sweetly mutilated,
Lensky rejoiced. His designated
while, marmot-like, he hibernated --
Tatyana watched the moon, and floated
on waves of far niente floated,
to eat and drink, then separated
with Tolstoy's2 brush, or decorated
his tale of youthful love, narrated
the thought sank in, and penetrated:
on dining-chairs are all prostrated;
portfolios nobly illustrated
of secret pain... but it's now rated
So glut yourselves until you're sated
can it be true, and firmly stated
Seeing Vladimir had defected,
The tomcat, mannered and affected,
a bit provincial and affected,
quite self-absorbed and unaffected
as infant sleep, or the unaffected
his bow was wholly unaffected.
his strangeness, wholly unaffected,
In French Onegin had perfected
He sang of love, to love subjected,
which held him silently subjected,
assembly, silent and dejected?
not the plain, timorous, dejected
the crown of marriage was projected
the noise their rustic wheels projected --
where scribbling friends have interjected
she'd never join the game selected,
But who stands there, in this selected
undressed, by candlelight selected
by fresh ennui as he reflected
of light that flowering fields reflected:
give for a bookshelf, a neglected
a park, enormous and neglected,
Whenever nyanya had collected
before Onegin there collected
and although Troy's greybeards, collected
around Priam the much-respected,
Once home, he brought out and inspected
However closely he inspected,
Often of course you'll have inspected
that visitors must be expected.
they find her somewhat unexpected,
His father died; and (as expected)
and the churchyard where, new-erected,
and my whole life has been directed
singing in chorus as directed
But my Eugene that night directed
once on the highway he'd detected
there was no trace to be detected
Thronged by adorers, I've detected
their masters' berries undetected
I know, Godsent one, I'm protected
by deep and shady woods protected;
and whist, that's now so keenly f&ecirc;ted --
By now whist's heroes have completed
from dish of water, rings are shifted
with tufts of snow; and through the lifted
in due succession; hers is lifted
No path to see: the snow has drifted
He was too young to have been blighted
of swaddling clothes - already blighted!
above a stream the moon had lighted.
his soul still blossomed out, and lighted
And suddenly her radiance lighted
Suddenly, from a crest, she sighted
of five more steps they went, slow-gaited,
love's crown, delectable, awaited
now, by green tablecloths awaited,
that on the world's staircase there waited
expecting winter, nature waited --
with recent fortune, vainly waited
she sang of childhood's fun, indited
the headpiece-text is thus indited --
Where is the fire that once ignited,
where two old pinetrees stand united:
Winter!... The countryman, enchanted,
his nag has smelt the snow, and planted
Yet - fear itself she found presented
Sometimes a landscape's represented,
she grew accustomed, and contented.
in tears and violent tossing vented
our disposition being invented
a tomb, a Cyprian shrine's invented,
Lensky of course was quite untainted
instead the chance to get acquainted
his mind's eye focused on the hinted
Between the lines of text as printed,
the vales dry out, grow brightly printed;
the downy woods are greener-tinted;
Since earliest boyhood he had doted
with tenderness he'd watched and noted
A thought was born, and quickly noted...
To harmless idleness devoted,
But it was passion that preempted
From that rough spell at last exempted,
to the hero that she'd adopted.
she sighed, and in a trance coopted
a foe - our mood should be warm-hearted.
''Poor Yorick,'' said he, broken-hearted:
Outside the gate Tatyana parted
sadly he mourned for the departed.
treaties of nations long departed,
but soon the ways we trod were parted
Reader, I wish that, as we parted --
Between them, every topic started
at earliest morning out she started,
Eugene would willingly have started
So there she stood, forlorn, deserted!
Now for the first time she's escorted
Was she the Tanya he'd exhorted
of this our novel we reported,
jealously, shyly, I've imported
which smilingly your friend, supported
but, without asking, they transported
She was like him and always sported
a hundred times afresh distorted;
And long, as if through mists that spurted,
Eugene turned countryman. He tasted
till then had been dispersed and wasted --
he found too much that he regretted:
With reason, too: for when he'd vetted
forehead, he strummed, his vision flitted
before the clavichord with knitted
that she's so trustful, and imbued
by heaven with such an unsubdued
with grave goodbyes to the bereaved,
the strophe over which I slaved;
had long been wasting and enslaved
by pain and languishment; she craved
for maybe fortune will have saved
as if some goal had been achieved.
sweet old tradition was preserved:
Russian pancakes were always served;
conclude that it's high time she wed!...
paterfamilias (unwed),
perhaps for fame, he was endowed;
and blood had bubbled as it flowed;
and hope and passion; life had glowed
and happy licence are allowed,
by sluggish Lethe may be swallowed,
the trail the youthful poet followed
by now his bride-to-be has wed
at thirty, lucratively wed;
the carriage of the newly-wed.
a stride on Petrarch's path, allayed
and soon will day's bright tune be played;
or Freisch&uuml;tz as it might be played
the murmur where the streamlet played...
of house-familiars stands dismayed...
and, hands a-tremble, Nyanya prayed
while she's from top to toe surveyed;
Lensky has watched: his rage has blazed,
he's lost his self-command, and crazed
the man she feared and idolized --
among the guests she recognized
the lucky bard, and as he dozed
and put a cross-sign on the maid.
by nervous hands of a schoolmaid:
nor his,2 who sings of Finland's maid.
a masculine disguise to aid
and those we sing for will be paid
after the martyr's price it paid,
was the first thing that Olga said.
Her eyes were opened, and she said
then, stepping nearer, Eugene said:
So my Zaretsky, as I said,
his awkwardness, he's hardly said
stumblingly call to mind he did
but at the window, in the splendid
this Grandison of hers was splendid,
two verses of the Aeneid.
Still tumbling, devil, snake and Cupid
Still in the porch, exhausted-stupid,
the bear let out a roar, and held
on springtime grasses of the field,
under the table's linen shield,
from her Monsieur took on the child.
beyond the grave we all must build --
He was sweet-natured, and yet wild.
times were when I was sharp and bold:
had made his name, when, bold as bold,
the ancients have gone stiff and cold,
Boston and ombre for the old,
the moderns rage against the old.
before their eyes they see unfold
with fire from every cross of gold.
''My sweet, my dearest heart, I'm old,
Is he a Melmoth, a Childe Harold,
they praise the Father of the world.
and now at last he saw the World.
lawgiver to the modish world?
We each have enemies in this world,
ditties of our secret world,
ditty of our secret world,
in manifesting, as he could,
spying my features, as he could,
and been as happy... as I could!
of calculated slander should,
already stirred him as they should.
your Zeus, your Cypris, your whole band
a flood on which no frosty band
his illness lends him courage and
until the grave by your strong hand:
to the princess, in his weak hand,
now warmth and blossom are on hand,
a Lancer wooed and won her hand,
have clearly got the upper hand
I leave the verdict in your hand.
the letter from Tatyana's hand:
for quite a while by fortune's hand.
each grips his pistol in his hand.
or letters in a young girl's hand.
had been imposed by winter's hand;
in untold beauty close at hand.
I feel a small foot in my hand;
put a strong staff into my hand,
in front of you, on every hand,
more searching than Chateaubriand;
sometimes, in reverie's sacred land,
the spring invites you to the land
long, lively tales from wonderland,
of ruts that grace our fatherland.
to save the honour of our land
and took a mortgage on his land.
and blesses the unrivalled brand
with me to see an alien strand;
hear my confession as I stand
and on their marks has made them stand;
His father failed to understand
Tanya begins to understand
Olga is there, he sees her stand
you see your fated tempter stand.
to ask of you that you transcend
perhaps her love could in the end
to see my kin, and in the end
interior d&eacute;cor in the end
a hidden beauty in the end:
same Pom, same husband to the end;
a true companion to the end,
He drained his glass down to the end
But you, blest husbands, to the end
and give her comfort to the end:
his choice could shock or might offend;
you know I'm hard to comprehend...
whoever you may be, a friend,
''All right, I'll come then...'' ''What a friend!''
But don't be cross, my darling friend,
Bordeaux, you're like a faithful friend,
have reunited friend to friend!
if you'd still been with me, dear friend,
still has Monsieur Finemouche for friend,
you kept your friendship with our friend:
the poet struck down by his friend!
by nature, contradiction's friend.
''Boredom, that's what so bad, my friend.''
I don't know why, but for my friend
He's here - Monsieur Guillot, my friend.
give me the homely hearth, and lend...''
in grief that nothing else could mend;
Martin Zad&eacute;ka fails to mend;
Goodbye, for now we make an end.
On whom alone can we depend?
my father blessed me. So I'd spend
his acts and words to suit our end?
we weep for the young lover's end,
my fate, it leads me to what end?''
whither does all my yearning tend?
the horrid nightmare must portend
Onegin wastes, you'd almost find
reverie hounds you, and you find
he leaves a tender verse behind,
his tea with rum quite left behind,
custom is despot of mankind.
cold, pure as ice, and as unkind,
your cold discourse, were less unkind --
in any picture of this kind:
and useful goods of every kind.
someone towards whose heart and mind
unfathomable to the mind;
with pots and basins out of mind,
in deep anxiety of mind.
can yet keep nail-care much in mind:
rewards the music of your mind
that poison brew; and in your mind
your Tanya's image in your mind,
caricatured them in his mind.
she doesn't see, or doesn't mind;
to know you, swooned, and in a second
Who in the princess for that second
Evgeny echoed him: ''My second?
and also prettier, I'll be bound,
''Get up: it's gone six! I'll be bound,
pursue his love - and at one bound
it stirs her drooping soul to bound
she stopped at the loud torrent's bound,
though there he's no more to be found,
a corpse on boards was all he found,
was quite beyond his wit, we found.
at least her tone is sometimes found
what was it in your heart it found
of mind got clarity new-found;
will reach, and past the tomb's compound
reader, you ask, and I'll expound --
by dreary snowdrifts piled around;
gazes at all the scene around;
Ist&oacute;mina,11 thronged all around
and glittering whiteness all around.
spread out its shadow all around --
as it assembles them around;
stood thunder-struck. In what wild round
Onegin's waiting on the ground.''
let fall his pistol on the ground.
he's left sad footprints on the ground.
by Naiads, one foot on the ground,
close as a shadow on the ground;
perplexed... and rooted to the ground.
an offering ready for the ground.
the pensive Dryads' hiding-ground.
from Million Street16 came floating round;
to her glass porch; pursues her round
I'll make them spar another round,
with thoughts of him in ceaseless round.
the programme of his daily round.
and the poet, without a sound,
emotion, thought, and magic sound;
at noontime does his horn resound
and then a drozhky's clopping sound
his heart was plunged! A sudden sound,
more tender than it used to sound.
hymns of the ages never sound.
frenzy which wrecks our lives for sound,
She hates a friendly voice's sound,
and listen for the heart's first sound,
the blood came smoking from the wound.
with our poor girl was kind and good;
honest devotion to the good,
as gage of all things that were good,
of leaves that autumn killed for good,
she guards, in silence and for good,
and wrecked the flooring-boards for good;
And then she broods and mopes for good,
bidding us to reject for good
regard, and slipped away for good, ...
Farewell the games of golden childhood!
commands our rhymester-brotherhood:
your presence aches, and in my blood!
your advent swamps me in its flood!
fancy, a wine serene in mood,
with Eugene frozen where he stood.
below a hill; a garden stood
there's not a word she's understood;
a house, a village, and a wood
he fell in love with darkest wildwood,
and trails alone around the wood.''
by the new whisper in the wood?
Buy&aacute;nov's heels have split the wood
if I, like you, had been a bard.
perfervid language of the bard,
which Ovid sang, for which the bard,
out of the hand of that same bard:
of Gulnare, he would play a card
but in the old days she had heard
or worse, to a soir&eacute;e. Unheard
How could she? why, he'd never heard...
came out so soft, it scarce was heard.
from the first moment it was heard
the source's chattering voice is heard;
the tolerant Evgeny heard --
and always the inspired regard --
with puzzled and confused regard...
on jam, and speeches in regard
Tatyana lowered her regard
and tears were drowning her regard.
Olga's no life in her regard:
condemned to a lifetime of hard,
as at a censure that was hard.
in deepest thought at the chess-board
and dead ideas from that old hoard,
Eugene attends the boulevard,
She entered the deserted yard.
Now nearer... hooves... and in the yard
to rains, and flax, and the stockyard.''
he's racing millward like a bird.
he sends, a second, then a third.
as yours did, Homer, godlike lord,
but scarcely understood a word.
she sat there; through her teeth a word
acute and subtle - in a word
and pale, and fade without a word!
and looked at him without a word,
I really dote upon the word:
Arrived apace, he gives the word
No, she's already pledged her word
to Eugene's letter, word for word.
of trumpet, dagger, mask and sword,
and there a tombstone says its word
and washed its face, to her brought word
all that today we find absurd.
and everything is cramped and loud;
might have resounded long and loud
Melpomene wails long and loud,
as much as in Moscow the proud.
my giddy mistress made me proud.
while a mazurka holds the crowd;
among my friends, in all that crowd
before a cold, indifferent crowd,
long, long ago... no, that could be
To private tastes we each subscribe:
the usurers' voracious tribe.
Deserving object: there can be
old Uncle's end was soon to be.
But ours, whatever he might be,
I'm terrified - so let it be...
and brains, and an attractive face.
swam on the river's dreaming face,
into the all&eacute;e, face to face,
of our first meeting face to face,
the men confront them, face to face:
did any glasses seek her face,
fresh as a poppy-flower, your face.''
caressing breath has fanned my face
play on the window's frosted lace;
garden, a modest home, the place
but in his songs kept pride of place
a restless urge for change of place
the grand monde finds it out of place.
has made the park her brooding-place,
from young Tatyana's dwelling-place,
others prescribe a watering-place.
that with him to the trysting-place
still after many years in place.
in our first ages), from no place
had ruled out reading, in their place
in rural calm's most secret place!
when galloping at headlong pace
up the hillside at breakneck pace;
to aim, at steady, even pace
sigh, and stood up, began to pace;
too faint to stir a further pace:
has lately wintered, just a space
each took four steps across the space,
alone across the fields of space,
in through the door, at swallow's pace,
she can't escape at any pace --
she speeds her footsteps to a race,
and opened Schiller... but the embrace
a soul of sympathy and grace,
though some support it with good grace).
and then, with an enchanting grace,
they sit, they cross themselves for grace.
a few books had escaped disgrace:
fortunate one, he'd not disgrace;
Horace
of instant thoughts, a fleeting trace
your night of fretting's left no trace!
coquettishness has got no trace --
The bitterness was mine - the ice
their joyous way across the ice;
would launch into self-sacrifice;
he'd pop the poison in his chalice!
was his; we'd both drunk passion's chalice:
there waited for us both the malice
what traps he'd set him, with what malice
boy-tribes with skates on loudly slice
someone like you and me, just nice?
girls' albums, signed in blood for choice;
encore Mo&euml;na,7 - and rejoice
conversing in a singsong voice;
to know the audience hears his voice.
to Moscow settled in a trice.
pure passion's flame, and in a trice
and I'll be thirty in a trice?
that, though polite, was clear as ice.
such good and sensible advice;
At least I'll give him some advice:
Can it be true, it won't come twice --
to the circle of our dance.
to life and hope with just a glance --
there was a softness in his glance:
or else disturb my mournful trance
it brought back Tanya from her trance.
of recompense beyond endurance,
It fascinates by its assurance
gay nature and its sparkling distance!
from any gentlemanly distance;
a stall, a kitchen and a fence.
by flickering past us like a fence.
and no one's ear could take offence
no boy, to fight or take offence --
for him, at night, before the indulgence
&lt; that there existed, for the indulgence
Spoilt by the habit of indulgence,
with irresistible refulgence,
raised a dull eye to moon's refulgence,
now dazzled by one thing's effulgence,
An unknown yard, she sees from thence,
here's boredom, madness or pretence,
Without romance, or false insistence,
more joy still when with mute insistence
as helpmeet in my sad existence,
Farewell to you, my free existence!
From his first youth he'd known the force,
and not without a sigh, perforce
puts out the lamps; the whole brigade
where every day a bloodstained shade
just now of wrestling with his shade,
for him a lofty stair. His shade,
into the tomb's mysterious shade;
with mournful sound the secret shade
had come to him in field and glade;
the days grew shorter, in the glade
the coolness of the sombre glade,
Tanya is gripped. No comment's made
poetry's sacred frenzy, made
they heap up silver with a spade;
her progress at the masquerade.
and in a singsong voice confide
the inmost thoughts that girls can hide.
I love you (what's the use to hide
and felt himself love's invalide.
past the grand ladies, see her glide;
by two small oaktrees in a ride.
beloved friend, thou art my bride!''
ranges, Lenora2-like, she'd ride
for honour, a straightforward pride.
&lt; amongst the soulless men of pride,
since then my heart was wrenched aside;
barrels, and then to drive aside
he's moved... you see him from the side.''
she sits down calmly on one side,
thumps as the balls are pressed inside
there gathered at the coffin-side
perfidious blow to my inside,
as did the general at her side.
to help her from the other side;
the new moon, horned, on her left side,
feelings he valued - from outside.
Friend of my heart, be at my side,
breakneck by moonlight at my side!
to gentlemen on every side
Tatyana groaned above the tide;
that I prefer to Champagne's tide;
And now the door is opened wide,
raised nose and shoulders high and wide
the fools who sparkle far and wide,6
of every funeral far and wide;
tranquillity, and solitude --
set to well-known children's glee:
with The Well-Meaner10 on her knee?
show me the sense. Divine decree
sits imperturbable, and free.
who can combine it with the free
now sensitive, and now carefree,
my tedious taste for feeling free.
at feasts, was strong and fancy-free?
on points that all long since agree --
but you'll undoubtedly agree
Chapter Three
to drain, on credit, bottles three.
each springtime, on the growing tree,
or else, from far off, he could see
yet dared not trust what I could see.
''The house, the park... I'll go and see!''
light dreams for new ones... so we see
perhaps, though Phoebus warns, I'll see
Onegin too - and there to see,
kept asking: "shall I live to see"...''
becomes a horse for all to see;
at first, with God knows whom to see,
and put his glasses on to see
''who loves you more than I, let's see
I hear you say. But can you see
Now here's a letter, as you see,
the peaceful Muses' devotee,
when in the park, in the all&eacute;e
have each asked him to a soir&eacute;e:
and hate with malice; he whose life
to be respected all through life:
and daily scenes of modish life
yourself too long from social life.''
and I'll be true to him, for life.''
the climacteric of our life,
and dutifully shared his life
the sad beginnings of his life
always contented with his life,
far more than most who leave this life.
had nothing to employ his life.
how sad the scar of passion's knife:
where civil treacheries are rife,
the lies that in the press run rife,
thinking: he loved me, and in strife
just like a shadow, or a wife.
is yawned away with friends and wife
his children and his faithful wife,
and with no post, no work, no wife,
the war, the snowfall, and his wife.
and with his dinner, and his wife.
but I've become another's wife --
are bound, by every virtuous wife,
''But tell me who she is.'' ''My wife.''
has found a port for his old age,
as I recall a bygone age?
good-looking, in the flower of age,
when not quite eighteen years of age.
all this, at eighteen years of age,
I was just thirteen years of age.
are entered here, in friendship's gage,
and yet your honour is my gage
mountains are piled on every carriage,
Horses and coach are spliced in marriage;
the solitude of woods and tillage,
He's gone away and left his village,
to ensure that till next time our image
that in the usual Christmas scrimmage
Faublas'3 disciple for an age --
''Who would have thought it?'' ''What an age!''
he sang of lifetime's yellowed page --
shortened, or lengthened off the page.
''I close. I dread to read this page...
or novelties from fashion's page.
the Major's here: he's all the rage
that nubile maid of riper age,
with demoiselles of riper age;
and lives, a veritable sage,
Omens dismayed her with their presage;
a poet, and a Kantian sage.
adorned the sanctum of our sage.
each object held a secret message
as was the old suspicious sage,
is seized by Tambov's poet-sage;
''Sit down! how strange! it's like the stage
and yawn in silence at the stage
not even in her earliest age;
was younger still, but at that stage
of wandering tribesmen; while the ravage
of their society turned her savage,
Evgeny's total store of knowledge
Shall I depict with expert knowledge
where he was master of his college,
where the prize-boy of fashion's college
Faces before him flash and change
but I refuse to chop or change.
across the Baltic in exchange
for wood and tallow; all the range
at first she had no heart to range;
The censor's tribute, I'll arrange:
All who behold him find him strange.
but then she found their choice was strange.
''I know it all: my secret ache
his pup to grace the sledge, while he
nothing more lovable than he.
bright Northern Cleopatra she:
took her to his estate, where she,
of love's anxiety. Blessed is he
then quietly at last says she:
all in a blaze, I said: it's he!
and obstinate his look. But she
forward or back? it's true that he
through baseness of the soul that he,
Was it to no effect that he,
ours was no Grandison - not he.
am doomed to perish, yet to die
and in her grief seemed fit to die;
death on his brow, your friend should lie,
''r&eacute;veillez-vous, belle endormie.''
that moment, of a luscious pie
Five versts or so from Krasnog&oacute;rie,
Riding on the lugubrious prairie?
that soul without a moral tie,
moment the assembly seemed to shake...
I roam by the secluded lake.
a rambling walk beside my lake,
and so in the salons could make
were placed across the gulf to make
to his mysterious tree the snake
exhausted and done up, I take
that your proud glance is sure to take!
for what's been given us to take;
a tempting plume for you to take?
bear's gone; a hallway, no mistake;
a flimsy bridge whose every quake
And every morning I awake
and shouts suggest a crowded wake;
with the grand general in her wake --
a pretty girl exactly like
and in a corner make him choke
''Tanya's no child - it's past a joke,''
for Satan, love's a splendid joke.
on tragedy; but it's no joke,
will disappear as fast as smoke:
relations off, and never spoke.
they took offence at this, and broke
just at this crisis of his gale,
shutters are up, and all is pale
in question, gossip, news and tale,
the leather rein, to learn the tale,
in talk, so fruitless and so stale,
value the hero of my tale,
But from the hero of my tale,
with this the hero of my tale:
a skeleton jerked by a cable,
such crystalled scents as best are able
As far removed as they were able
years back, to call up many a fable;
Prepared for prophecy and fable,
a grammar, a digest of fable,
to wreck a maiden's sleep with fable,
that marble Nina's proved unable
the charge that poets are unable
''What of them, Tanya? I was able,
piled books, and through the pane the sable
bewitches Tanya... he is able
Now that the British Muse is able
and in the bath-house had a table
a group of monsters round a table,
two cupboards, one divan, a table,
She sits with Nina8 at a table --
the iron figure3 on the table,
put back the libel on the table
Porcelain and bronzes on the table,
for hours, with elbows on the table --
Oak-floored, and simple as a stable:
they needed kvas like air; at table
cooked-up where garret-vermin babble,
who never learnt how dreamers babble;
''But there'll be such a rout and scrabble
endorsed by fashionable rabble,
with every different kind of rabble...''
who never scorned the social rabble;
or cause the bursting of his bubble,
When out to burst a rival's bubble,
of jealousy, to seem to tremble
and frames would shudder, windows tremble;
now things are changed, now we resemble
How early he'd learnt to dissemble,
of sunlight makes it flash and crumble,
a block of snow will slip and tumble.
Sometimes his tricks would earn him trouble,
How early on he learnt to trouble
Then in return for all this twaddle,
from her they strive to coax and coddle
and dinner with a touch of idle
True, scorn should punish and should bridle
a steed responsive to the bridle,
Tatyana had no dolls to dandle,
bored by success' giddy trifle,
found that in laughter yawns could stifle:
Louder and louder sounds the wrangle:
a carving-knife - and in the tangle
bursts with cold envy and with bile?
his epigrams topped up with bile.
not even by chance, once in a while,
he even dares, once in a while,
to crack between them; for a while
The evening passes, and meanwhile
and wasted life's fine flower meanwhile.
galop, mazurka, waltz... Meanwhile
and for a chuckle or a smile.
a girl or two, without a smile
his destiny) without a smile
will the benighted reason smile,
already tends too much to smile
emboldened by his Olga's smile,
his virulence that made you smile,
befitting such a noble pile:
scarce out of bibs, already fickle,
fresh from the cot, an infant pickle,
he laughs - they all begin to chuckle;
He nods - they start to fuss and truckle;
and all the works of Fontanelle16 --
Nasce una gente a cui 'l morir non dole.
too pale, too thin, but on the whole
for happiness - that alien role.
was far from happy with his role.
foretells for her some wondrous role;
how well she'd studied her new role!
the fleeting tenderness that stole
such frank tendresse; away they stole
But God, how deadly dull to sample
Let others learn from his example!
of love so timorous and gentle.
and set off prompter than a whistle
Evgeny read the sad epistle
there's yap of pugs, and laughs, and bustle;
The hall is full of noise and hustle,
for dreams, or journalistic battle,
my husband for his wounds in battle
a vivid brush, a witty rattle --
would cause widespread remark and tattle,
Freed from its dripping cork, the bottle
and glumly serves the medicine bottle,
solemn, too long compelled to throttle
And the sly baseness, fit to throttle,
dons of Epicurean rule,
he read of course the sceptic Bayle15
he killed eight years in such a style,
that even so my wretched style
in sensible old-fashioned style.
unnoticed, in unseeing style,
''Which neighbour, dear? My head became
Was it for you that I became
an old man saw her as she came,
The fields are dark, since evening came.
that there be just one voice which came,
long since unstirred by praise and fame
Petrovsky Castle; and the fame
earn for me the rewards of fame --
and stately periwigs, their fame.
become a joke to us, its game,
to do them all is easy game.
all modish foes dread worldly shame.
to speak; believe me: of my shame
misunderstanding, noise, and blame!
which I myself won't praise or blame
nothing you did gave cause for blame:
and theirs was the poetic flame
of calm and reason, when the flame
In languid silence, or the flame
a novel graced with such a name.
you'd not so much as know the name,
rings proudly in that sombre name.
straightened his wig, and asked her name.
as scarlet heels have lost their name
though Menelaus, in Helen's name,
of far-away Onegin's name.
and not a mention of my name...''
like a true friend, to speak my name.
set off the ladies like a frame.
since I'm a member of the same.
while men, all sombre, all the same,
the hapless Phrygians all the same,
freezes my blood... Yet all the same,
that fired his soul, to burn the same;
new depths of boredom.'' ''No, the same.
of eloquence, and just the same
now she's bereft, and just the same
self-willed it may be just the same;
and part in kindness? Just the same,
Which one comes first? It's just the same
peopled my sleep, and to their theme
to pass the time was Eugene's theme:
of the cotillion's endless theme
Onegin - now once more my theme --
felicitously every theme,
of listening like a judge-supreme
what have your wits to do with me?
his Sunday game of cards with me.
to institute a new regime.
until Br&eacute;guet's unsleeping chime
no beauties of a foreign clime,
of something vague, some misty clime;
grew hardened to life's frosty clime;
summits of aspen, birch and lime,
a brook flows through a grove of lime.
in twilight of all&eacute;es of lime.
the horror of disgrace and crime,
she won't inhale the powdered rime,
that stretched from Romulus in his prime
Yet sweeter far, at such a time,
let's go where, winding all the time
and at the very self-same time
He sang of grief and parting-time,
across the years to our own time.
no noise of gaiety, no time
In winter, when for longer time
I'll end my tale some other time.
and manners of an earlier time.
advises him of dinner-time.
for her, no joy from winter-time,
is out of fashion in our time.
has found an end before his time.
youthful, who ripened in his time,
where are the reveries this time,
to where he came to her that time
And here my sentiments impel me
Hm, hm. Distinguished reader, tell me
torment of pride? And why's he come?
from ball to bed behold him come;
pointed each year, for time to come,
and, with it, forced renown to come --
of its unvarnished monochrome.
young Tanya first appeared to me,
to me her best in-quarto tome,
him prove it, writing after me.''
He destined Olga's hand for me,
whose memory will preserve for me
Tatyana's rites are not for me.
''Enough, stand up. It's now for me
allow no rest to you or me;
I've no one here who comprehends me,
and now a swooning mind attends me,
She folds the page, lays down the plume.,
(on orders which of course presume
that thievish mouths cannot consume
with the pink glow the snows assume
the strain of Tasso's octave-rhyme!
the youthful votary of rhyme
I need to rest from all this rhyme:
I own it: tender Parny's12 rhyme
the girls sing out the ancient rhyme:
love's melting dreams shall fill my rhyme,
our modern Russia's plague and bane.
to all that's trivial and inane?
lively, capricious, and inane...
Tatyana breathed on the cold pane,
ensconced beside the window-pane.
his mother taps the window-pane.
a hybrid cross of cat and crane.
of powers unripe, or on the wane,
reader, by painting you a scene
that king of the satiric scene,
no brilliant truth, no vivid scene;
''How long has he been on the scene?
Olga's appeared upon the scene,
But to the garden, to the scene
had once before, across the scene
he knew too well that sort of scene.
and nameless rivulet, that scene
broke greetings off, and gave Eugene
Zaretsky bit his lip. Eugene
and Lensky follows her... Eugene,
girls' tears, their swooning, for Eugene
No doubt about it, it's Eugene.
where Tanya now confronts Eugene.
of whispering woods where my Eugene,
moved and surprised, she stays serene,
no paradise can stay serene.
all point at her, and all combine
and yet by Vergil or Racine
and wore his dressing-gown to dine.
Vladimir Lensky. Quick, let's dine!
Clarissa, Julie, or Delphine6 --
with three roan horses in a line
may then amuse my glad decline.
a novel on the established line
the youth of those past days in line
left her to follow her own line,
won't benefit these guts of mine.''
to bellow out: ''she's mine, she's mine.''
Tatyana, lonely heroine,
youth's choice, the flower of French cuisine:
sang for the guests above the wine;
I'm much afraid that bilberry wine
a slipper, or a magazine?
in secret judgement what he'd done,
dreamt of reproving what they'd done:
one raves in verse like me, and one
her soul was waiting... for someone.
with work at home; but when he'd gone,
amazement: ''Where's your second gone?''
I do, I do. Well, where's he gone?''
Eugene takes Olga, and is gone;
for unmeant kindness - how he shone!
his gaze at Tatyana alone --
daytimes and evenings passed alone?
dumb I must perish, and alone.
''I am in love; leave me alone.''
all blend into Eugene alone.
a place for rest. Eugene alone
and where Terpsichore alone
of the whole world, her nurse alone,
in deepest grasses, quite alone,
No tearstains, nothing. Wrath alone
to come back to the hall alone
the units are ourselves alone.
that mediocre dress alone
as in the nook he'd sit alone
''where master used to sit alone.
then I'd have looked for you alone
together they arrived, and none
whisper repeated to the crone.
''And here's the hearth,'' explains the crone,
Chapter One
(if you'll turn back to chapter one)
taken your place, though not your throne?
Parisian taste invents for one --
in a melodious, flute-like tone.
are coloured in a single tone,
by blazing fireplace, and intone
is graven on that face of stone.
lend ears to my lugubrious tone:
dogged by one feeling, only one --
his song was limpid in its tune
of modish belles the modish foe,
I can see naught, as Hymen's foe,
to infuriate a clumsy foe;
sings as he plaits a humble shoe.
her darling foot of its wet shoe,
a passer-by; and on tiptoe
From here, deep-sunk in pensive woe,
consequences of hideous woe;
when shall I start on my escape?
It's time to drop astern the shape
for men to see, still in the scope
right in the flower of joyous hope,
Just let yourself be your whole care,
and ease his catch with all due care.
her fingers shake, she doesn't dare
as love's technique, when it would blare
its natural right to rave and flare.
for vanity, and din, and glare!...
and Grandison beyond compare,
Moscow has beauties and to spare:
youth is a fever; we must spare
Monsieur l'Abb&eacute;, the mediocre,
folly for me to interfere
the country's pretty stupid here!
how bold or bashful there, and here
and cattle roamed the plain, and here
''Today he promised he'd be here,''
closely embraced, in wending here,
with cause that I've recalled them here.
I keep them, and will quote them here:
is with dull trash that can't cohere:
Pikht&iacute;n, of the Hussars, was here;
he saw that, as in cities, here
beneath the stone reposes here,
the bear explains: ''my cousin's here --
Onegin's soul encountered there
her drops of tears, and seated there,
with young Semy&oacute;nova,9 and there
then suddenly she's off, and there
who sets me snoring then and there --
Saint Petersburg's fine flower was there --
his French valet, Guillot, is there
three pairs of handsome ones - yet there
unspeaking, too, but stretched out there
There's vacancies in plenty there.''
and where's her sister now? and where,
from whom he'd kept a letter, where
And if she happened anywhere
the faces met with everywhere;
pursue his pencil. Everywhere
its own perfection everywhere,
of sighs, and compliments, and fire;
secret sledge-rides in verse of fire;
Onegin looks with eyes of fire:
No feast, no welcome-gifts - with fire
doubts, to exhaust the heart, then fire
this soul that glowed with virgin fire.
poetic dreams, a brighter fire.
and found her dreams, her secret fire,
No, never in the hottest fire
we have to cherish and admire
he'll take you prisoner, you'll admire
the idol that she'll most admire
her youth with all his repertoire
is either the distrait Vampire,
they don't deserve what they inspire
the best revenge one could desire.
of boiling youth did I desire
is all those stubborn lips desire!
the full fruit of her heart's desire;
jealousy's flame, to light desire;
to wreak, by stirring Lensky's ire,
nothing could alter or could tire
I could describe here his attire;
nor crawled in suppliant attire.
Tatyana in low-cut attire
with all our hearts, and who require
to hear what latest modes require,
the heavenly lights in glorious quire
whom shall we never find a bore?
the highest circles are a bore.
the season which is such a bore --
of Olga: love's that kind of bore!
could they not laugh out loud, before
its image, then to swoon before
they'd settled that some years before.
their hands are dipped in scarlet gore,
what it's transported to our shore
of tales of girls, and ghosts, and lore:
your words, and in my soul to explore
is dressed, undressed, and dressed once more?
then he began to talk once more
the deeper in the wood, the more
is mincing manners - nothing more.
Of Lensky's fate they said no more --
self-portraits only - furthermore
''Abandon hope for evermore.''9
Since when is this?'' ''Two years or more.''
I kept in mind an ancient store
you were the first ones he forswore;
Malfil&acirc;tre
Reflection was her friend and pleasure
From all sweet things that gave me pleasure,
But now, in this vindictive pleasure
on her smug face a flush of pleasure.
I regularly take much pleasure
Friends, how my heart would leap with pleasure
by moonlight two young girls took pleasure,
his converse gave Onegin pleasure;
or servants waiting on her pleasure.
thank you for sorrow and for pleasure,
But in misfortune or displeasure,
there any friend of harmless pleasure
with jealousy beyond all measure
And then, to part us in full measure,
the secret of her husband's measure,
Who is there who will truly measure
so it was not in any measure,
Thank you for all the gifts I treasure,
Whom then to credit? Whom to treasure?
when suddenly I saw this treasure
O flowers, and love, and rustic leisure,
time was, in evening hours of leisure,
their table, and their hours of leisure?
she found, in labours and in leisure,
it touched with reverie her leisure,
she calls down curses on their leisure,
The place where Eugene loathed his leisure
ready to share our quiet leisure
He goes inside, corpse-like of feature...
that, meanwhile, pinched and glum of feature,
And so, at last, feature by feature,
He was convinced, a kindred creature
more thoroughly, thank God, the creature
the hall's without a living creature,
your matchlessness, to seek to capture
From hour to hour a surer capture
the circumstances of his capture
it's also true, in battle's rapture,
his soul to a delicious rapture
your feet, to pale and waste... what rapture!
and country stillness: there the lyre
enough of my loquacious lyre:
some vote a doctor for the case,
he has to bring the battle-case.
his pistols, laid them in their case,
on stage are thumping without cease;
impart such lessons as you please!
then afterwards, alone, at ease,
no longer does the herdsman chase
and portents of the lunar phase.
Tanya thanks each one with a phrase.
her out-of-fashion turns of phrase,
sits with Limburg's vivacious cheese
(for which he must receive due praise).
with heart that's grown unused to praise,
who all his life would garner praise
I never lived or wrote for praise;
by sighs of passion or by praise.
yet how I wish that I might raise
gentlemanly, quite precise,
his mind, so cold and so precise.
forty years long would criticise
for she was bored by laughs and noise
for tempests and for feasts and noise;
and he was bored with social noise;
have vanished, like an empty noise,
smiles, and a maiden's tranquil poise,
my declaration may give rise!
the morning after, a surprise
ambassador?'' In some surprise
or, with an epigram-surprise,
no matter: hope, in child's disguise,
at such vivacious, free good sense.
and mileposts grip the idle sense
the man of honour and of sense.
here there's no conscience, here no sense;
was his absorption in their sense.
where's the high aim, the ardent sense
of youth, so tender, so intense?
purport of other lines; intense
''Command me, darling, as you choose.''
and every night shares her repose.
That's when I'll sit down to compose
has hardly mastered postal prose.
far from it! just one more collapse.''
the all&eacute;e to the lake, the copse;
when we begin to talk of verse);
of ranks and ages so diverse.
of oligarchical converse,
prepares himself; and then his verse,
come to the fields, my friends! To horse!
he leaves the house, calls for his horse
the horses fidget worse and worse;
compact of amorous trash, and worse,
even in our names (and how much worse
the coachmen ring the fire, and curse
sets out upon her homeward course;
its winds had blown him far off course.
and magic nights. In headlong course
so, cursing women's devious course,
by the cold world's corrupt finesse;
were all the law that I would use;
Elle &eacute;tait fille, elle &eacute;tait amoureuse.
but, nurse, you see... Oh, don't refuse...''
I introduced my saucy Muse
within her bosom to abate,
Friends, all this meant was: I've a date
fresh leaves... for such is heaven's mandate.
to pranks and jokes of earlier date.
for you have, at this early date,
from cruel fortune such a fate?
you help him to an honoured fate
would on those evenings guess the fate
he would have found a normal fate.
resigned disposal of your fate.
the entire story of your fate.
the toll of those borne off by fate!
would be allied to him by fate;
you'll never leave me to my fate.
and I surrender to my fate.''
the pillars of the turnpike-gate;
leave far behind that city-gate.
looked down in an access of hate,
is tinsel on a life I hate;
sooner or later will relate
a vulgar touch. I can't translate.
for swapping bullets with my mate.
by calmly aiming at his pate
in loaded carriages, migrate,
he'd see his soul cool in its grate;
to fashion's absolute dictate,
of pity for my wretched state,
maid-servants from the whole estate
He saw the sad girl's trembling state,
''But so it is: I'm in no state
my house, my evenings, all that state --
their unattractive t&ecirc;te-&agrave;-t&ecirc;te;
What trifling could be more complete?
here a weak version, incomplete,
of plains where boredom reigns complete,
drew scrutiny no less complete --
lest in forgetfulness complete
where her security's complete.
the murmuring Nereids recite,
that I'm just longing to indite --
roofs, flowerbeds, fences, all in white,
a patriot, a cosmopolite,
coated with a thin layer of spite.
scarcely recalled their love, their spite;
proficiency to speak and write,
but madrigals I've got to write!
a grey-haired, perfumed exquisite,
with any torture so exquisite
and put them on a paced-out site.
bigot or prude? or has he quite
beside unfinished lines, a suite
Enough I've wandered in the suite
he stalked the drawing-rooms, remote
and in her unconsidered note
that's the morass, I beg you note,
still filled with Eugene, Tanya wrote,
from Boston's cloth or gossip's quote;
him far enough through wild and waste.
yes, focus on them your lorgnette,
And every minute his lorgnette
and an insouciant lorgnette.
and, under, ''toute &agrave; vous Annette'';
and set on hating the coquette,
that all of Russia can't contribute
beneath, a brook rolls its tribute
one pair! I pay them memory's tribute
it was goodbye, Monsieur l'Abb&eacute;.
over the Petersburg pav&eacute; --
to the first meanings of his flute.
stood in the door, cherubic, mute,
inside the Larins' house fell mute.
come in and warm yourself a minute!''
could I accept for just a minute
but now it bores me every minute.
an inn at each stage of the route.
slave of the service, was en route.
reflection or provoked dispute:
Godfearing folk will institute
on billiard-table rests a cue,
our vessel's long been overdue.
her journey home is overdue.
you've paid insanity its due.
already high in treason's league!
already studying to intrigue,
unhesitating from her tongue,
your early life, unlock your tongue:
to cool my glances and my tongue,
Now hear the friends in dialogue:
and stoves with tiles of various hue.
the sky is brilliant in its blue
is this the riddle's missing clue?
of a provincial ing&eacute;nue,
Now, to my cost it may be true
am always glad to write, it's true,
ourselves on our landfall. It's true,
A sorry state of things, it's true!
what wings our first successes gave!
who early died as die the brave'' --
as he descended to the grave.
''This is Vladimir Lensky's grave
Chapter Five
there'll be a fight. For that I give
promptly had nothing left to give.
is this then what you can't forgive?
this very day I'd gladly give,
in her once more has come alive.
the glare, the fumes in which I live,
Such feckless passion - as I live,
had only debts on which to live.
relined and strengthened for the drive;
but youthful, virgin hearts derive
whose heart on dreams was wont to thrive,
like fields in spring when storms arrive.
at last the final hours arrive.
why fight what's known to be decisive?
A man who's active and incisive
not cold, but also not effusive,
she was unhurried, unobtrusive,
bestirred himself, was devilish active!
he found Tatyana so attractive,
what can one do? as said above,
had chased me to the world above.''
in ink with colour-wash above;
you're all in fever... heavens above.''
vexation? vainness? heavens above,
a lyre, and on it perched, a dove --
revive it with another shove --
frightened to death a timid love,
ages we'd never heard of love:
''Nurse, I'm not ill; I... I'm in love.''
it can't be youth's distemper - love?
until this day, a lady's love
recalling earlier loves, did we,
has wished it an abrupt goodbye --
penates, came to cast an eye
men made their bows, and sought her eye;
not only by Evgeny's eye;
What ails him? he's in some strange daze!
to meet his thirsty lips... What daze,
to heart. And in his misted gaze
arrives, the girl's exhausted gaze,
parade before their mocking gaze
of tears will cloud her tender gaze.
Tanya pursued them with her gaze...
with years no more to meet our gaze?
watch for your smile, and catch your gaze
homestead, before her parents' gaze,
looks at him with a steady gaze,
has fixed on her a steady gaze.
the simple legend - then a haze
we were swept off, in reverie's haze,
down slopes of mountains, when a blaze
her eyes are lowered, but ablaze,
his head upon her shoulder... blaze
has kept him warm in chimney's blaze
more and more brightly still they blaze.
apartment where a double glaze
and all into the salon squeeze,
and taken by the French - some prize! --
with Eugene proved a tempting prize.
each moral puts us in a doze,
The ploughman there delights to doze,
as I have... learn from my belief
of Morpheus had induced relief
or pining, Olga's hours were brief.
she once had pined in girlish grief,
that inexperience leads to grief.''
his sweetheart faithful to her grief.
yet, truthfully and not in chaff,
upon the side of the distaff --
who'll clap an entrechat, or scoff
their cloaks; Zaretsky's measured off
And now the two opponents doff
at Cleopatra, hiss her off,
in a peaked cap, all dust and fluff, --
and in flat calm I've found the stuff
now even Didelot's tedious stuff.''
and took two Petriads in calf,
he charged three roubles and a half,
that was less clever still by half.
he never took one from the shelf,
and leant upon the granite shelf;
odd volumes from the devil's shelf,
could see no harm in books; himself
just as the Poet15 paints himself.
is forced to crucify himself,
where in the heart of silence rang
of many distant lands he sang
the bliss that fills me when your throbbing,
a suite of elegies that, throbbing,
How heavy, and how near to sobbing,
So you, inspired Yaz&yacute;kov,4 sobbing
each news of her he'd been imbibing --
his style breathed love, and not the gibing
had fortune blest me by prescribing
''Could I be happy circumscribing
all was material for transcribing:
No madrigals were for inscribing
a sharp-nailed paw towards her; bracing
to his Tatyana, yes, he's racing,
it melts, away it rushes, racing
Tatyana looks with pulses racing
above the water started tracing
beyond a doubt, its wondrous tracing
a saucy kib&iacute;tka is slicing
He sweetened up with fancy's icing
was still mysterious and enticing --
its furrow through the powdery icing;
Now he's returned, what role's he dancing?
behind her followed wildly dancing;
Still as he was? has he stopped prancing?
Bacchante-like, her flighty prancing;
and Paris too. But hear my pleading:
In summertime - for he was leading
Dressed like - --,14 duly dreading
What happened? Though his eyes were reading,
be good enough to go on reading:
the barbs that envy's always spreading,
still hardly opened up, from fading.''
He mounts the sledge, with daylight fading:
what's in them? All this loud parading,
and all this flashy masquerading,
that poisonous worm, despised, degrading,
a hermit's life - he'd be proceeding
It's over. Supper is proceeding.
Each one by now is badly needing
desires and dreams and griefs were breeding
his collar in its beaver braiding
of solitude, and peace abiding!
and in it boldly I'm confiding''...
he stoops and, tenderly confiding,
he steers her, nonchalantly gliding,
is death, not pain. So gently gliding
for shame and fear my wits are sliding...
They're settled in; and crawling, sliding,
Vladimir drops, hand softly sliding
each in tumultuous turn descending
On the seashore, with storm impending,
Whatever for caprice of spending
ingenious London has been sending
What of it? Nothing. I'm just sending
but, inside brackets, I'm contending
and there, love's protestations, binding
There you're entirely sure of finding
No, I was born for peace abounding
''The peasants there have wealth abounding,
(that half-pay archivist); and bounding
listless, impatient, for the pounding
in goods and fame!'' But the sad-sounding
&lt; Petushk&oacute;v's nails and spurs are sounding
has voices that are more resounding,
They sing; unmoved by their sweet-sounding
Her husband enters, thus concluding
he and Onegin start alluding
Tanya (profoundly Russian being,
or simply bow: within her being
the utter virtue of their being,
in the expression of its being,
shocked by their modish pride, and fleeing
but piteous he, the all-foreseeing,
a word or two, or stare unseeing,
in Russian winters thrilled at seeing
stare hard at her before exchanging
In swarms around Tatyana ranging,
bottles to which some pitch is clinging:
(alas, too salted); now they're bringing
she's turned up in my garden, bringing
his beasts outdoors at dawn, nor ringing
while in the hut a girl is singing;
she loved the steppe-land and its singing,
came distant horns, and gallant singing.
and then a boat, with oars a-swinging,
its echoes, its belated urging,
its wayward tricks, its violent surging,
outside the house. But you'll be aching
to whom, in a fine flow of preaching,
he had conveyed some moral teaching,
the hour was late. And now from aching
was stripped away, and mists encroaching
their southward flight: one saw approaching
audacious tunnels will be marching:
and iron bridges will go arching
They've missed Eugene's completed etching.
But she who modelled for the sketching
that queen of secrets and of sighing.
inspires your lute to sounds of sighing?
Now Tanya's groaning, now she's sighing;
daren't look behind her; fairly dashing --
our troikas effortlessly dashing,
And now, monotonously dashing
Then our Automedons are flashing,
with spinning noise and senseless flashing
breaking the lilac bushes, smashing
the shepherd sings of Volga's fishing
Below it, when sprang rains are swishing,
and for her cheeks to cease their blushing;
but wildly still her heart is rushing,
all a pure maiden's love was breathing.
Elbow on table, spirit seething,
Not so? ''No, sirs, the ode's the thing,
For such am I. When you were speaking
and ''what's your name?'' she asks him, speaking
the foes, cold-blooded and unspeaking,
affected pose - and an unspeaking
it was quite torn in half and breaking.
after your drive, it's quite back-breaking;
only the pallor of heart-breaking
a far-flung traveller who was creaking
is sad old moon's... Hark! snow is creaking...
council, and with profound head-shaking
Tatyana flushed, and started shaking.
and growing thicker; then, heart-shaking,
night of the second, started flaking.
his life till dawn's already making,
Neighbours in whispered tones are taking
over the business of leave-taking,
''the mail explains the time he's taking.''
a scream rings out... the cabin's quaking...
Then, after midday he'll be waking;
Next day Tatyana, early waking,
and your alas-ing and alack-ing
''oh, quit your stale, your tedious quacking,
is this the man that you were seeking?
''Now march.'' And calmly, not yet seeking
She looks: forgotten past all chalking
the merchant's up, the cabman's walking
a riding whip. Tanya keeps walking...
maiden in this superb, unthinking
spurs of Chevalier Gardes are clinking,
incendiary looks are slinking,
would have divined the tender, shrinking
Straight up the chimney, pipes were smoking.
such is the usual country cooking;
Vladimir, wealthy and good-looking,
The hearth was low beyond all stoking.
towards his stall, the pedlar's hawking;
But it's the talent for concealing
that, artless, and without concealing,
behind deceit or double-dealing?)
The storm is over,5 dawn is paling,
fancies once more are hotly bubbling,
as if beneath her, dark and rumbling,
through him is sweetness' self. In grumbling
Chairs are pushed outward, loudly rumbling,
as from their luscious hive go tumbling
once more that touch is fiercely troubling
I know your heart: it has a feeling
her love obeys the laws of feeling,
allows her hand, that's lost all feeling,
hate, love, joy, sorrow - every feeling,
Tatyana leaves Onegin kneeling,
''Why, Tanya, what...?'' ''All's dull and trifling.
''I can't sleep, nyanya: it's so stifling!
''My dearest heart, you're sick and ailing.''
calls out his name... All unavailing:
''I am in love,'' Tatyana's wailing
just sentries to each other calling,
is calling us, for ever calling --
when night patrol's a perilous calling;
our Mother Eve: we're never falling
amongst devout coquettes, appalling
Silence was everywhere enthralling;
urbane betrayals, and the chilling
he struggled to bite back the chilling
tribute of tears, applause's shrilling,
to Eugene all was new and thrilling;
there сzerov8 shared the unwilling
sets a sonorous cadence rolling --
now ten has struck, his wheels are rolling,
gossip, and tricks, and the patrolling
and there at large he goes patrolling
then night comes on; the moon's patrolling
Meanwhile, attired for morning strolling
Once more he counts the hour-bells tolling,
Who's not disgusted by cajoling,
No, early on his heart was cooling
it's easy, without too much fooling,
We all meandered through our schooling
no, not for long were belles the ruling
to roar of banquets, din of brawling,
lickspittles who adore their crawling,
the towers of whitestone Moscow beaming
in quilted coat, where rays were gleaming
stirred at your gaze, so strange, so gleaming,
one customary object gleaming,
But now they're near. Already gleaming
how proudly, how divinely gleaming,
a fisher's fire. Through country gleaming
believes in her elected dreaming
how sensuously her eyes are dreaming!
embodied by the power of dreaming,
She dreamt of portents. In her dreaming
silver with moonlight, in her dreaming
perpetually, one goal for dreaming,
He lay quite still, and strange as dreaming
and everything around was dreaming,
you'd made appearance in my dreaming;
respect, and mercy for my dreaming.
Shot through below the chest - and streaming
through gloom and mist; and there came streaming
More wine, he calls, to drench the flaming
before a fire too slowly flaming,
have snorted, reared, and whitely foaming
started a life of pointless roaming,
These figures from the world of seeming,
Why is Tatyana guiltier-seeming?
What power enslaves you, with your seeming
magic of sleep had started claiming
when Br&eacute;guet's chime is heard proclaiming
and wakened Lensky by exclaiming:
meanwhile the local Cyclops, aiming
and duck get up; with instant timing,
of gossip, and set comment humming
his news has set the party humming!
to drop all that old-fashioned mumming;
she trembles, and with fever drumming
a different mask? is he becoming
Meanwhile the news of Eugene coming
the regimental band is coming,
awaits him - hears nobody coming.
the frozen corpse, drives off, and homing
as all things did, to bore him; homing,
of innocence: a lily blooming
I see another problem looming:
He could have spoken without harming,
he should have settled for disarming
I must translate - there's no presuming --
Away inside that unassuming
when, utterly worn out by rhyming,
she holds a letter up, and leaning
and, on my bed-head gently leaning,
that strikes him with such force and meaning?
with love and comfort in your meaning,
And all grandmothers who are listening
just yesterday.'' ''And since your christening
my thoughtless pen has stopped designing,
''The morning star will soon be shining,
And all the while the moon was shining
but I perhaps will be declining
and with its feeble glow outlining
I write, my heart has ceased its pining,
among the guests a general dinning:
His visitor from the beginning
he takes her to a chair, beginning
And now there's gradually beginning
they're on the dance-floor, waltzing, spinning.
Zaretsky watched, and stood there grinning.
and so, before the world of learning,
If Tanya'd had the chance of learning
He'd brought back all the fruits of learning
devoted to the Muse, or learning,
the thirst for work, the lust for learning,
This work of the profoundest learning
But finally she heaved a yearning
you drink the magic draught of yearning,
and where is love's tempestuous yearning,
earth's rim grows light, and a forewarning
the herdsman's horn proclaimed the morning
the occupations of the morning.
into the fields, surveys the morning,
pinker than glow of Northern morning,
whisper of breeze announces morning,
would settle, on the morrow morning,
If only Lensky'd known the burning
are we recalled to grief still burning
On an old aunt, who's long been burning
Your curiosity is burning
a spirit strange, a spirit burning,
a mansion stands just round a turning.
Or, unconsoled by the returning
no years of absence past returning,
she walked, but just as she was turning
one day came down that lonely turning,
shelter for trysts at every turning;
comes clearer through the mists of dawning.
outside, the scarlet rays of dawning
Risen with earliest rays of dawning,
no vision of her fields is dawning.
for which of them the tomb was yawning,
''Tell me, what's your companion doing?''
the level tenor of his going,
Olga's adorer comes a-wooing.
He sees: in slush, stretched out and keeping
of one sole thought holds him in keeping
Alas for him! there was no keeping
the shades of night within their keeping
''You're ill, God have you in his keeping,
into a modish tyrant's keeping
he consecrated to my keeping?...
with lines to mark where they were sleeping...
and stops his doleful heart from sleeping:
as if she'd been profoundly sleeping,
motionless as one soundly sleeping
is softly, indolently sleeping,
her sacred store of bliss and weeping
on my untimely urn be weeping,
Tatyana dear, with you I'm weeping:
I'm near to sobbing, near to weeping!...''
Poor Lensky! Set aside for weeping,
hunts cheeky flies, with swatter sweeping,
one wallows in delicious weeping;
There too, he honoured, hotly weeping,
still coughing, hissing, clapping, champing;
the audience still is busy stamping,
Or, in your lonely homestead, moping,
from off her charming shoulder's drooping,
his weary head, and softly drooping
At last, with dawn upon him, stooping
and sideways her poor head is stooping.
up your accounts, and raging, toping,
Triquet sings, out of tune. Loud clapping
ignores approval's friendly clapping,
and where Thalia, gently napping,
great bard despite his modest trapping,
her golden earrings off and whipping;
Now powder's greyish stream is slipping
Already Olga's hand was gripping
into the pan. Securely gripping,
and now the crunchy snow is stripping
the urn of perfumed tea, and tipping
But while she roams in thought, not caring
and though to do so would be daring,
So down came Tanya, hardly daring
a general of majestic bearing
He finds the shock beyond all bearing:
before you on the ground, unhearing,
the clink of rowels, met his hearing;
nor from the bath-house roof be clearing
if, motionless, no life appearing,
Tatyana's husband, now appearing...
Petushk&oacute;v, local Paris, tearing,
it's my profession; he was wearing --
for grumbling, gossiping and swearing
Elated by the music's blaring,
One melancholy fop, declaring
scarlet with passion's instant flaring,
All sleep: from the saloon a roaring
here's tea that Olga's been preparing;
that she's ''ideal'', begins preparing
set off our troubled mind comparing
or else does nature, fresh and staring,
her bosom heaves, her cheeks are staring
to draw a breath, around her staring
Only from Tanya's heart, no cheering --
and gallops. Pistols made for pairing
beside his heavier half is snoring.
cows low, in the still nights of spring
some splendid lady is referring
Deep down, an epigram is stirring
The old dame had no thought of scouring
So, like Childe Harold, glum, unpleasing,
no glance so sweet, no sigh so teasing,
in all its mystery. Hymen's teasing,
log cabin a pretentious-teasing
over the slush, where is he chasing?
By now the rays of spring are chasing
that's the refrain that you should sing,
gripped him no more; soon they were raising
''I dread your stern regard surmising
a calculation past despising --
her worth (but anathematising
Once more he turned to books, unchoosing,
they kill the zest of rhymed composing,
The years incline to gloom and prosing,
the nightingale's begun to sing.
a great attraction to conversing.
to his disputing and his cursing;
and eatables beyond all classing
of any Br&eacute;guet: and in passing
And while with all despatch he's dressing
new guest is gradually progressing,
the unworthy husband through depressing
admires the tumult and the pressing,
''What in the world is more distressing
he warns his man for duty, stressing
I longed, like every breaker hissing,
to smother her dear feet with kissing.
but ladies' hands are not for kissing;
''The man's a boor; his brain is missing,
to meet a black monk, or if crossing
would leave her dithering and tossing.
Moscow... how many strains are fusing
that fiery souls' headstrong enthusing
everything's dim and unenthusing;
appears offensive or amusing
even the scandal's not amusing;
How often would I fall to musing
some nonsense thrown up while carousing,
or if himself, with rage arousing,
while Petersburg's already rousing,
Manzoni and Chamfort,12 perusing
And Eugene? half-awake, half-drowsing,
She's dressed since dawn, dead pale; debating,
she's nearly swooned, she's suffocating;
meantime she'd give the maids a beating
Love's frantic torments went on beating
in you a tender pulse was beating,
Mushrooms in brine, for winter eating,
we'll keep love's price appreciating,
The house is packed out; scintillating,
He's flown to Talon's,4 calculating
Hurrah! let's start congratulating
''By virtue of procrastinating
he wakes; a bath where ice is floating;
reader, we must be separating,
From violent passions fast pulsating
While Lensky'd long been meditating
and thus our race, so fluctuating,
Evgeny! ''Ah!'' Tatyana, fleeting
There came a murmur, for a fleeting
light as a shadow, shuns a meeting,
''I noticed once, at our chance meeting,
Then what resulted from the meeting?
For cousins from afar, on meeting
what came from this unlooked-for meeting;
Smiling through sleep, nature is meeting
about one thing, till our next meeting.
the infant year with cheerful greeting:
on visits to us, and in greeting
that lady the hostess was greeting,
there never fails a kindly greeting,
a story that still wants completing;
Hours pass; no answer; waiting, waiting.
the gallery claps - it's bored with waiting --
Zaretsky, engineer-in-waiting,
We too shall find our hour is waiting;
that there his friend Kav&eacute;rin's5 waiting;
flows and reverberates. Reciting,
Vladimir shuts the book, for writing
Three whole hours, at the least accounting,
giddy as Venus when she's mounting
Childe-Harold-like, Eugene's devoting
untouched by envy's bitter smarting,
Weltered in tears, and sorely smarting,
he who has cooled down love with parting,
As if before some mournful parting
the old dame wept her daughter's parting,
she saw no friendly figure starting
the horse gets wind of them and, snorting,
sets the wise traveller cavorting
That point I wouldn't mind contesting,
''The elegy's just vain protesting,
and though perhaps old fires were thrusting
a soul so innocent, so trusting.
they're plunging, whirling, all but squatting.
at last alone, and quite forgetting
On such indifference, such forgetting
Time races, and she's been forgetting
Only the estate provides a setting
Can she have found the enigma's setting?
then in the study's quiet setting,
his spindly, shaggy nag. As fitting,
Her eyes along the margin flitting
Just facing Tanya's where they're sitting;
The bearded outrider is sitting
she lowers darkened eyes, unwitting,
declares itself in ways unwitting --
there's crashing, rumbling, pounding, trotting,
he had the talent of saluting
accounts were done, a winter outing
while serious topics were disputing,
that from the backdoor he'd be leaving
I'll stop that tempter from depraving
he murmurs: ''Olga's mine for saving;
and all is lost beyond retrieving;
lies bright, and vast beyond perceiving;
At first they called; but on perceiving
The north wind blows, the clouds are driving --
Since dawn, whole families have been driving
Evgeny waits: and here comes driving,
Already now the talk was thriving
''Tell me, our neighbours, are they thriving?
towards the Larins' and arriving
She dropped... ''It's he! Eugene arriving!
They laugh. The guests begin arriving.
then, country evening fast arriving,
now golden autumn's just arriving.
your dashing one, is she surviving?''
of hope is somehow still surviving
with combs, and steel utensils serving
as files, and scissors straight and curving,
the answer's past all human viewing,
What fate is my tomorrow brewing?
and when its waters were not showing,
and band already tired of blowing,
roses romantically blowing;
his sobs, where his live tears were flowing;
and entered. Ballroom overflowing...
The sky breathed autumn, time was flowing,
and warmed the Chinese teapot; flowing
Day faded; on the table, glowing,
and good old sun more seldom glowing;
How often, when the sky was glowing,
four fateful stairs. Then, without slowing
may spend a century in flaying
and tell of children's plighted playing
once, with its foaming and its playing,
Bubbles like Hippocrene are spraying;
There was a pine-branch downward straying
I'll catalogue each simple saying
it's new to us, beyond gainsaying;
No one will think that worth gainsaying,
time was when morning's breeze was swaying
will in my soul be hushed and dying.
Uncle, in bed, and near to dying,
no time to pick it up - she's dying
So went his sermon. Almost dying,
And yet, although it's past conveying,
and some were even testifying
dead ash sets no more sparks a-flying;
In fact one day a note came flying
By now the shades of night are flying,
to lift her skirt up; still she's flying,
through heaven's expanse serenely flying,
by mist of tears, without replying
Two weeks the matchmaker was plying
and captive girls, by Salgir20 lying.
But he's mistaken: Eugene's lying
yes, in that spring-time, in low-lying
soon, infidelity proved cloying,
else, having found his pleasure cloying,
hope sting it, then we'll try deploying
and friends and friendship, soul-destroying;
secluded vales, where swans were crying,
my hours in fear and bitter crying.
the rosy sealing-wafer's drying
that modish rings were still a-buying.
and radiate a rainbow: blazing
shadows that flit behind the glazing
the third day, wood and hill and grazing
neighbours in high content are wheezing;
The banquet's given no cause for sneezing,
inns don't exist; but in a freezing
at heart by grim remorse's freezing.
the pain, the grief, the marrow-freezing
Giving his pistol-butt a squeezing,
and where the husband, recognizing
shows freedom's advocate, that strong
such rustic cunning can't be wrong!) --
champion of rights, as in the wrong.
so long as they're employed in song:
were you in love when you were young?''
our native speech had never sprung
to talk as if with heart unwrung,
of time between the wolf and dog.)
the sober head, detesting each
the young hostess, towards whom each
your heart some self-restraint; for each
You'll love again, but you must teach
so sketchily possessed by each,
his dull, sick look, his dumb reproach --
I hear the wrath of your reproach.
in my petition an approach,
his humbly suppliant approach,
the flickering tones of dress and speech,
is it not true that Russian speech,
and take due warning from my speech.
human reaction, every speech
now pay attention, I beseech,
the Russian N, like N in French;
soon all that went without a wrench:
so that all three went off to lunch,
with lies and jokes that packed a punch:
the tongue of love and of Petrarch.
Petrarch
set the guests smiling at his arch,
with foppery and too much starch,
was asked around as quite a catch --
you won't find that quite so much catch...
and all the neighbours planned a match
but when you've managed his despatch
a dog with horns, a goatee'd witch,
a rooster head, and on the twitch
I love my Tatyana too much!
no vulgar epigram too much,
both set him yawning just as much.
once I too liked it very much;
a portrait with a charming touch;
held in constraint by pity's touch:
a modish taste, a dowdy touch --
there's no absurdity as such,
along the Neva in a sleigh,
summons his people. On the sleigh
breaks a new passage with his sleigh;
impatient, hatred flaming high;
my Africa,18 where waves break high,
custom's bestowed us from on high.
and offer to that ash a sigh;
were picking berries from the bough,
the bloom has withered on the bough;
choked up. There's no wreath on the bough;
The poet's dead... already though
he turns away: ''I've had enough --
you'll recognize him soon enough, --
of perfect bliss in you. Enough!
with deep emotion through and through,
so pure, so spotless through and through,
Sbogar,8 mysterious through and through,
and scorned his fellows through and through,
allows no comfort to come through --
who in the dark came flashing through
and sighs, and asks oneself all through:
and arm in arm they all go through;
in triumph you'll see winter through!
he'd drink his coffee, flutter through
and to Tanya, when he was through,
crossed to the window, read it through.
is finished, and I've looked it through
I count each hour the whole day through;
he eyes the door, looks slyly through.
the meaning of an epigraph,
Lensky composed in autograph
a madrigal for epitaph.
the driver sits and cuts a dash
Who taught her all this mad, slapdash,
but by and large their talk's a hash
heartfelt, imploring, touching trash
of the most harmless, hopeless trash.
in sheepskin coat with scarlet sash.
''Wait, I'll present you - but you banish
just there, is talking to the Spanish
but first, the dreams that hope can cherish
Dear Tanya, you're condemned to perish;
Poor Tanya's bloom begins to languish,
Meanwhile Onegin starts to languish:
suddenly lowering eyes that languish,
there's nothing can employ her anguish,
Tatyana, hunted by love's anguish,
he's got consumption. In his anguish
her thoughts away, knew how to lavish
Another had the skill to ravish
fades from the view, and in the hush
its due oblivion, in the hush
of waiting for the dawn to blush,
his neighbour entered at a rush
accounts, shaved forelocks,4 Sunday bath;
towards the simple urn beneath;
over it a mysterious wreath:
fieldwork directed from the path,
and raven curls of shoulder-length.
paved roads will traverse Russia's length
and he pursuing, till at length
an eloquence of fevered strength,
bringing her unity and strength;
she flies no more, she's lost her strength.
God grant them years and years of health!
won't even cross their minds by stealth...
of neighbouring owners of the earth --
a seedling fallen in the earth.
so fires of spring will bring to birth
There once I too strolled back and forth:
the abstracted poet would bring forth
fragments of poems from the North,
but I'm allergic to the North...1
only to Eugene showed their worth;
but here we must control our mouth.
parodies winter in the south;
take leave of my lightheaded youth!
a friend of yours in his first youth
nanny, companion of my youth;
my noon is here, and that's the truth.
your pride, some answer, or in truth
fancies, my rhythmic search for truth,
I
a gulf has gaped... Says Tanya: ''I
I'd not have known you, therefore I
and, with my Eugene, so have I.
I
II
II
II
III
III
III
III
III
III
LIII
LIII
XLIII
XLIII
XLIII
XLIII
XLIII7
XLIII
III
VIII
VIII
VIII
VIII
VIII
VIII
LVIII
XLVIII
XLVIII
XLVIII
XLVIII
II
VIII
XVIII
XVIII
XVIII
XVIII
XVIII
XVIII
XVIII
XVIII
XXVIII
XXVIII
XXVIII
XXVIII
XXVIII
XXVIII
XXVIII
XXVIII
XXXVIII
XXXVIII
XXXVIII
XXXVIII
XXXVIII
XXXVIII
XIII
XIII
XIII
XIII
XIII
XIII
XIII
XXIII
XXIII
XXIII
XXIII
XXIII
XXIII
XXIII
XXIII
XXXIII
XXXIII
XXXIII
XXXIII
XXXIII
XXXIII
XXXIII
XXXIII
II
LII
LII
XLII
XLII
XLII
XLII
XLII
(XXXIX, XL, XLI,) XLII
II
II
VII
VII
(I, II, III, IV, V, VI,1) VII
VII
VII
VII
VII
LVII
XLVII
XLVII
XLVII
XLVII
XLVII
VII
(XV, XVI,2) XVII
XVII
XVII
XVII
XVII
XVII
XVII
XVII
XXVII
XXVII
XXVII
XXVII
XXVII
XXVII
XXVII
XXVII
XXXVII
XXXVII
XXXVII
XXXVII
XXXVII
XXXVII
XXXVII
&lt; XXXVII7
XII
XII
XII
XII
XII
XII
XII
XII
XXII
XXII
XXII
XXII
XXII
XXII
XXII
XXII
XXXII
XXXII
XXXII
XXXII
XXXII
XXXII
XXXII
XXXII
LI
LI
LI
LI
XLI
XLI
XLI
XLI
XLI
XLI
It's time she went. But what can I
the poet's only theme is ''I.''
All in good time, on each point I
La, sotto giorni nubilosi e brevi.
VI
LVI
XLVI
XLVI
XLVI
XLVI
XLVI
I
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
XVI
XVI
XVI
XVI
XVI
XVI
XVI
XXVI
XXVI
XXVI
XXVI
XXVI
XXVI
XXVI
XXVI
XXXVI
XXXVI
XXXVI
XXXVI
XXXVI
XXXVI
XXXVI6
XXXVI
XI
XI
XI
XI
XI
XI
XI
XI
XXI
XXI
XXI
XXI
XXI
XXI
XXI
XXI
XXXI
XXXI
XXXI
XXXI
XXXI
XXXI
XXXI
XXXI
In stead of happiness, say I,
I
I
verdicts of vanity the bleak,
so much, I'm left no time to speak!
but all concurred that, truth to speak,
none listens when the others speak,
of traveller's tedium at its peak:
I might have seen you, heard you speak
is agony, if I may speak,
men's thoughts, their plots, the words they speak,
he was a menace, and a freak.
to pass for an affected freak,
does he still pose, and play the freak?
all shout and argue, laugh and squeak.
says the old lady in a croak:
a crayfish rides on spider-back;
the other, jugs of applejack,
in taffeta of mourning black.
by dint of cuff and kick and smack
fruit liqueurs and an Almanack
they managed to disperse the pack.
and swaggers in a red calpack;
and hid the bookshelf's dusty stack
Lensky's thrown down. The murk is thick
avert his chest from pistol's click,
and never played a shrewder trick.
lest he should by some clever trick
but when past joking he fell sick,
Eugene has caught up, quick as quick,
Vesper is met by crow of cock --
the branches of the oak with flock;
and sleeping sounder than a rock.
across the fields, round hill and rock;
but pantaloons, waistcoat, and frock,
and finally be turned to rock
these words are not of Russian stock:
grow cold, and hard, and stiff as stock,
already she'd assume ill-luck.
By dire presentiment awestruck,
any Madonna by Van Dyck:
the flaming roses of a cheek,
to kiss Armida's lips, or seek
to hope that even once a week
their journey took them a full week.
what play will he present this week?
of course! you're bidden there next week.''
behind the mill. In solemn talk,
I'll just remark, my verses talk
replies: ''We might as well.'' They walk
and riches, and the wish to thank
their guests, for all they ate and drank,
were served in order of their rank.
I move in the grand monde? that rank,
she peers discreetly through a chink
but meanwhile let him live, and think
where you were born as well, I think,
Ladies of such a cast, I think,
parting with Olga made him think
at hours, which, why I cannot think,
and sees... whatever do you think?
in stars upon the river-brink.
and bred upon the Neva's brink,
you too have seen on Neva's brink.
So now be off to Neva's brink,
parterres, she runs to rivulet's brink,
the enjoyment of a friendly drink,
the heart inside him seemed to shrink;
first flakes of snow whirl round and sink
even without me it will sink;
to gasp, and on a bench to sink.
fruits of my labour and my ink...
like Delvig3 when he's dining drunk.
he sounds, in lyric frenzy sunk,
in morning time he'd read a book...
terse words or crosses in the book,
God grant that from this little book
at any other sort of book.
and, in her hand, a small French book.
at the Academic Diction-book.
more closely at the grammar-book;
by Lensky in his Olga's book;
in father's or old uncle's book,
or else a query's wondering hook.
with lively and pellucid look,
Tatyana had a changeling look
though years ago I used to look
had left the squire no time to look
sad meditations in her look,
heeding the press, will make us look
or else, my friend, how does it look?
And just here, in the window-nook,
and to that far and lonely nook
was an enchanting country nook:
his elegies flow like a brook.
by ancient limes, or by a brook;
where flows a little glittering brook,
deep in distraction, his own rook.
then Lensky moved his pawn, and took,
coldness of wit; each note he took,
would bless the form his fortune took.
you called there twice, and since then took
in her own home. She never took
for heart's delight, or fun, you took,
blessed are daytime's care and cark,
blest is the advent of the dark!
Tatyana, sleepless in the dark,
from her my lips will learn and mark
makes to her nurse low-voiced remark:
a mild rebuke was his worst mark,
and then a stroll in Letny Park.
amateur of caprice and quirk.
as much of banquets and the cork
in this fifth chapter of my work.
Muse of the epic, bless my work!
let no more such digressions lurk
you made me drunk as one could ask!
with draughts from love's enticing flask,
she'd never tell them news or scandal
over the modish word ideal,
goodbye to you, my true ideal,
the mountain maiden,19 my ideal,
the cooks prepare the midday meal;
used in times past to ring a peal
he dozed away; but when the real
and yet so light. All that is real
and coachmen swear, and women squeal.
my carefree song would thus reveal
a novel, vague and superficial,
over his neighbour's plain memorial,
Lensky, restored to his manorial
two sisters who'd received the initial,9
But let's return to our essential,
it had its epigram-potential7...
of other's thought - a splendid goal;
be doomed to feel it: there's one goal
his thoughts were on a distant goal:
his Strasbourg pie, or point a moral,
But he could draw a joking moral,
so heartless and so detrimental,
and to the vision of those mortal
to bring across Lepage's4 mortal
she can't; Evgeny's pushed the portal,
By now the sledge is at the portal --
I find myself no longer equal;
where can we find your equal?
then from the Muse there came revival:
my soul in secret gave survival;
and still exempted from removal
Though long since Eugene's disapproval
the subtle spouse was just as loyal --
and the majestic, antlered royal,
while floors would split from crash of heel,
or cunningly create a quarrel,
and though he liked a fiery quarrel --
and volume three of Marmontel.
had killed his best friend in a duel;
Lensky resolved before the duel
Still blazing with resentment's fuel,
to A&yuml;'s vintage in the sequel
was finding leisure's vacuum cruel;
and sink to prose's humble level:
No hope! no hope! He leaves the revel,
(like passion's dream, that other revel)
Now, faced with this enormous revel,
he whirls her through the wood... a hovel
But how she jumped, when in this hovel
who else? - the hero of our novel!
shows up through trees, all of a grovel
we visit them, or without fail
dear ladies' feet fly past like hail,
''it's time!'' and freedom hears my hail.
send them good wishes through the mail
let me acquaint you on the nail
to face him now I feel too frail...
and on their captivating trail
I signal to each passing sail.
and still within, behind the veil
lift up the gauzes of her veil,
on foot, by seven o'clock, until
sed alia tempora! The devil
wishes his madness to the devil,
installed in me a different devil,
he'd got annoyed, the tricky devil.
we'd better hasten to the ball,
and in full brilliance shines the ball.
on dance-floor, at breakup of ball,
direct from shipboard into ball.
swiftly decayed beyond recall
I have no leisure to recall;
she quite forgot - began to call
the threshold's thronged, wet-nurses call,
whatever you may need, just call...
Beds are made up; the guests are all
like foliage in the rotting fall.
I know it, in the thoughts of all
like Chatsky,5 he arrived to fall
for angry heirs, as one, to fall
the art he'd studied best of all,
of husband's friendship - worst of all!
enquired the lady of the hall:
brigade of liveries in the hall,
packed from the maids' wing to the hall.
they all have swarmed into the hall,
the keys that opened up the hall.
are old times, and the servants' hall.
''No, no, I'm sure the party's small.
Tatyana asked. The children all
moonscape, the half-light overall,
of aunts and mothers, and the thrall
sentiment, notebook, verses, all
''Maidens, pretty maidens all,
the Lord have mercy on us all!
Onegin has outrun us all.
''it seems that he forgot us all.''
Relations. No-one else at all.
guests bow, feet scrape, and children squall.
Lord Byron's portrait on the wall,
at any hour escape his cell.''
with scorn to make my world a hell.
whether from heaven or from hell,
shall make my story grim as hell;
she went inside the empty shell
although it's nearly heard the knell,
my friends, I need to pause a spell,
and teaching children how to spell.
Since then Martin Zad&eacute;ka's spell
beauty with all its heavenly spell,
no, quite naively I'll retell
and walk, and breathe, before I tell
this angel, this proud devil, tell,
from the agent, with this tale to tell:
he trembles, knows not what to tell;
is needed, nothing's left to tell.
to tales that young moustachios tell.
in which our hero used to dwell.
Still for ever, fare thee well.
Farewell, familiar woods! Farewell,
wished him to come and say farewell.
the cunning prisoner can quite well
in his small shack, will listen well
and breeding ducks and geese as well,
spectacled age divines as well,
he's happy, yes, he's almost well...
spirit that anguish had made ill.
that spring with me has had its fill
can read enough to get my fill.
Onegin, drenched with sudden chill,
he reached the stream below the hill;
she finds in river and in hill.
at two-ball billiards prove his skill;
early tomorrow at the mill
without an elegiac frill,
sits there beside the window-sill!
She sits down by the window-sill.
and sat down by the window-sill.''
of work made him feel sick, and still
Lensky's estate, there lives and still
darts to the boy, and looks, and still
as sacred, lies before me still.
he scowls - and the whole gang are still;
But now Vladimir's doubts are still:
and heart so tender, it can still
a country house - and one who still
empire, and fled it; happier still
''She was the one who looked as still
Princess Alina. She was still
drank in your words when all was still --
The darkness thins away; but still
A new acquaintance claims our quill.
no word came flowing from his quill;
such stubborn brain, and vivid will,
from early morning on he will
Often she halts against her will,
engaged then - but against her will;
he drinks - all shout and take a swill;
is he who's never felt its will,
in play with her obedient doll
then he presents her with the scroll.
of raging passion's surge and roll
and watched a different world unroll.
the world's &eacute;clat, its thunder-roll,
that wit embarrasses the dull;
to the complacent and the null;
the child prepares for protocol --
Public opinion - here's our idol,
graduates of the Levshin1 school,
what feelings would assume control
has gone to Olga, swept the girl
past all the assembly in a whirl,
Throughout their life, so calm, so peaceful,
for them, in Butterweek5 the greaseful,
''It is a friend I sing, a youthful
The years would pass; no longer youthful,
I drop my hero... I'll be truthful:
Perhaps however, to be truthful,
wild as a forest deer, and fearful,
But ever stranger and more fearful:
a red-foot goose, weight something fearful,
Shy as a savage, silent, tearful,
and skids and tumbles down; the cheerful
on goose's neck, a skull looks cheerful
he stood there, pensive and forgetful,
Happy is he who's known its fretful
Evgeny stood, with soul regretful,
with sighs unconsciously regretful.
is known today; only a soul
oppressed by emptiness of soul,
before such playfulness of soul!...
Tatyana turned with thirsting soul:
still captivated his young soul.
not bad at all; and then each soul
left quite alone with his own soul,
with Olga, all have pierced her soul;
he's called you out - say, in your soul
had won her loyalty! What soul
and swarming in his inmost soul.
in vain on my unworthy soul?
ever so roughly rocked my soul!
or else lifts up a fallen shawl.
or seminarist in yellow shawl!
into an unbecoming brawl.
at sunken wax inside a bowl:
he's first to toast her in the bowl,
XL
L
L
L
L
XL
XL
(XXXIX,2) XL
XL
XL
XL
impatiently on the mill-dam,
in her torn heart - a fickle gleam;
some other, older spring will gleam,
the kiss where youth and freshness gleam;
has taken on a silvery gleam;
meanwhile a hallboy handed cream;
Oh God, what did he think!'' A dream
in midst of a poetic dream,
freedom's enthusiastic dream,
arch-commentator of the dream.
I liked his quality, the dream
and as in some appalling dream
another, a more chilling dream,
adore the love that comes in dream.
O Brenta, I'll see you in dream;
of a delicious, guiltless dream...
or for that Demon4 of my dream.
oppressed her like a heavy dream.
to spoil loose paper by the ream;
all plunged his soul deep in the stream
Down there, by slow degrees, the stream
its barely noticeable stream.
the shady wood, the talking stream;
into the cups its darkling stream --
the magic voices of your stream,
retired, as he, from fashion's stream,
dean of Chaldea's learned team,
from German realms of mist and steam,
covered the golden coal - the steam
condemned the millstones as a sham.
some ladies preach from Say and Bentham,
the fear and rage with which I foam!
Walking? The country that you roam
hereditary foes they seem,
Zizi, my crystal and my gem,
Or he knew how to reconcile them
then later slyly he'd revile them
the tighter we can stretch above them
With womankind, the less we love them,
a grizzled Calmuck stands to meet them,
stretched on a sofa, calls to greet them.
It's true, I'll not misrepresent them,
how they remind me of your stem,
a Lancer - how she deified him!
Schiller and Goethe had refined him,
And our young poet - Olga fired him
and thoughts of her were what inspired him
He roamed the world, his lyre behind him;
life's real meaning would have found him;
at length, midst children swarming round him,
already there she stands beside him;
he really forced one to admire him --
My uncle - high ideals inspire him;
At home she'll equably receive him,
But she refuses to perceive him,
dared clean his nails in front of him,
he's a freemason too; for him,
He wakes - and who is this who writes him?
Prince N. respectfully invites him
cherries then we'll throw at him,
and redcurrants throw at him.
red wine in tumblers to the brim --
of evening, and those tears, the balm
those walks amid the gloom and calm
they while away the morning's calm.
could not conceive how solemn Grimm13
Tatyana! it's addressed... to whom?
despite herself, is Lensky's doom;
a humble cross, in woodland gloom,
the girl remains there in the gloom
and festal evenings in the gloom.
a nightingale, in forest gloom,
far-distant heaven's vaulted room;
grows, surges, boils, for lack of room
clears in a flash the freezing room;
across the plain's enormous room,
that lady whose engaging charm
the easier they become to charm,
enticing nets to do them harm.
to garden walks, as arm in arm
so effortlessly can disarm.
''There, just in front of all that swarm,
you see the two in uniform...
to look like sad romanticism.
dressed up a desperate egoism
Semy&oacute;n Petr&oacute;vich, mean and glum,
at soldier-husbands, and the drum.
untirable, at sound of drum:
epoch's portrayed, survived the ban,
and feel once more emotion's ban.
so, if we want to change, we can!
of tempests, in what raging ocean
asked Lensky: ''Should we start, I mean?''
the clamorous honking geese began
You've guessed before it all began:
Evgeny quietly began
as bonneted Academician
How often on the steep Caucasian
Herder, and even at times a Russian --
between their girls and this half-Russian.
They should be forced to read in Russian,
and even honourable man:
my strange, incorrigible man.
for her improvement, a roman,
claiming Tatyana'd found her man;
So a disabled soldier-man,
works where contemporary man
than households where the wife must moan
to lift his pistol up. A span
and jokes and spiteful gossip ran
lay on the fields; in caravan
The princess, sitting peaked and wan,
and Werther, martyred and doom-laden,
without surprise or rage... his laden,
her look, so sweetly sorrow-laden,
Books, riding, walks, sleep heavy-laden,
Here's tea: the girls have just, as bidden,
when, from behind the doorway, hidden
sometimes from a fair, black-eyed maiden
the flower-like pallor of the maiden,
she sees it all. The simple maiden,
all for our tender dreamy maiden
walked homeward round the kitchen garden;
locked himself up inside his den
of happy love. For I have been
and truffles, which have ever been
of prejudice that's never been
however strongly she has been
on a small table's oilcloth sheen
return an answer, blunt or keen,
at once they give a man the spleen.
of his own room, how cruel spleen
use cunning silence as a screen,
a marksman crouching in the green.
and on the flames let fall unseen
so virtuous that, no sooner seen,
the hare who from afar has seen
the jug of bilberry wine is seen.1
and once forbidden fruit is seen,
harboured by maidens of thirteen!
a note from Lensky; in between
In passion's sluicing rain they freshen,
I might have said a word, and then
with deeds; that dunces now and then
in lives that were just dawning then.
to talk of this and that, but then
God's thunder burn you up! And when
were chanted, I remember when --
immortals picked by fate for when,
''Oh nurse, I'm sad, I'm sad, I'm shaken,
you find the country godforsaken;
but now the mansion is forsaken;
A sledded coach, for years forsaken,
of chalk the window-panes have taken.
Departure date's long overtaken;
''So to strange kinsfolk I was taken...
our joy in you is warmly taken.
''You wrote to me, and nothing spoken
Moments of silence, quite unbroken;
the boring wives, the ill-bred men,
e sempre bene, gentlemen.
of blind Fortuna and of men
take wing on spite; that serious men
of human friendship, holy men,
and with a yawn took up his pen,
by Baratynsky's3 wondrous pen,
Martin Zad&eacute;ka was the siren,
tread the calm, settled path they've chosen...
Here comes the yard-boy, who has chosen
No look, no word for him: she's chosen
in one so slothful, so hard-bitten?
because some glance of his has bitten
In love with fame, by freedom smitten,
The illness with which he'd been smitten
What if your pistol-shot has smitten
what odes Vladimir might have written --
a swift, polite reply is written.
And foes he sees, long-since forgotten,
comrades despised, and comrades rotten;
and the derivative Knyazhn&iacute;n:8
Chapter Seven
the untiring city, where you've given
flown like an arrow, then he's given
Forsake, indulgent reader - driven
Up to the porch our hero's driven:
to Eugene; nineteen to the dozen,
about them - nineteen to the dozen --
she appears before him, grim and frozen.
the rogue has got a finger frozen:
The sky is clear, the earth is frozen;
are here untouched by fashion's reign,
was one who raged and raged again,
would not have recognized again
of virgin fancy, and again
the youthful lover once again
fate could be something else again..,
On this we'll part; goodbye again!
after two minutes, off again,
we sometimes like to hear again
from waxen cell the bees again
thought, day and night, and thought again
and looks out on the darkened plain.
the charm of what was grave and plain.
No, all in her was calm and plain.
already silvering all the plain...
levy their tribute on the plain;
she walked across a snowy plain
in silence all day she'd remain
a furious, boiling, heaving main
radiance of Dian, sits in pain
and records of a heart in pain.
and rightly so, but now his pain
her full account of voiceless pain?
reduced to sense, not without pain --
advantages of heart and brain,
to hit the target: thigh or brain.
God grant you took at least a grain.
on modish malice, coarse of grain
here, seize it quick for this quatrain!)
To whom do you, from all the train
to raise the safety catch and strain
a dwarf with tail, and a half-strain,
of jealous girls, devote its strain?
plunged in reflection's deepest train,
something like spleen, that scourge of Britain,
to your loved ones? They do maintain
but Eugene hasn't moved; for certain
of hills has hid the moon; for certain
in that new couch, no sleep for certain;
He who has lived and thought is certain
days that are lost behind the curtain,
round the dim river sleep; the curtain
No sleep, beneath that silken curtain,
and parts the fringes of his curtain;
Oh, this could all be false and vain,
runs after what is sweet, and vain.
no artifices of the vain...
it hurts, he laughs, and all in vain
He deemed, in general, letters vain,
for, mistress-like, it's brilliant, vain,
that this of all things for a swain
once more renounces world and din.
with comedies of swarm and din;
he heard in stillness and in din
in midst of trouble, storm or din.
there caustic Shakhovsk&oacute;y8 came in
but salt; near the princess a vein
Tatyana's Letter to Onegin
yet he'd back you through thick and thin:
a deathless murmur from within,
whose serfs are miserably thin;
through it they're known to me, and kin.
on kennels, and on kith and kin,
he loves you... like your kith and kin!
surer than friendship or than kin,
Italian nights, when I'll drink in
fat P&uacute;styakov has driven in;
and pay my debt in the same coin
but I won't praise you - let me join
the spring of honour, and the pin
on which the world is doomed to spin.
He was a good and simple barin;6
''A humble sinner, Dimitry Larin,
drives home - and plunging deeper in,
Buy&aacute;nov, my vivacious cousin,
so often from her Moscow cousin
on liquor, and on hay brought in,
and entice a fellow in
When we draw a fellow in,
leads Olga and Tatyana on
In duels a pedantic don,
on a fast stallion from the Don,
by country freedom, rightful pardon
since, through the mist that dreams arise on,
He looks, and answers: ''Agafon.''4
swaying the artless, waiting on
he saw no point in staying on,
yet people's malice and suspicion
''Now don't suppose... let no suspicion...
of hope and gloom, romantic-fashion,
I'm yours, in a predestined fashion,
he's seen it all; with looks and fashion
they fluff her curls out in the fashion,
in which the rhymester-man-of-fashion
ended his wild career of fashion
no softball for the winds of fashion,
But, now I've praised the queens of fashion,
amid the deadening joys of fashion,
All this has now gone out of fashion,
in music's own bewitching fashion
I'll conjure up that swooning fashion
wronged always in disgraceful fashion --
had gone in no uncertain fashion
hope that he's had no time to fashion
if I had power to choose your fashion --
Evgeny thought in just this fashion.
sharing her in promiscuous fashion,
Tatyana pined in secret fashion:
Already, in exultant fashion,
How often, with her sweet communion,
When I defected from their union
Fonvizin8 sparkled, freedom's champion,
Enchanted land! There like a lampion
you acted well, that dread occasion,
He reads to Olga on occasion,
her secret work of magic suasion!
of moralistical persuasion,
earnestly striving for persuasion
your icy look, your stern dissuasion,
How dull are acting and evasion,
Then Tanya hears of the decision.
stands in dismay and indecision.
to puzzle out with some precision
thirty-two steps with great precision,
which has recalled, without precision,
To face society's derision
stays fixed and focused on a vision
Tatyana's haunted by her vision,
which, listening with some condescension,
Perhaps some secret apprehension
they all have richly earned a pension;''
over the note holds in suspension
In the white heat of some dissension
He got so used to this immersion,
As with old friends, she craves diversion
or joined us poets. His conversion
in gossip's rambling and discursion
let not the poet's soul of passion
The arbitrary rules of passion
excited not a hint of passion:
than this humiliating passion
he sends a letter, penned with passion.
He gave this figure - loved with passion,
facing a belle I loved with passion,
But you, grand tomes I loathe with passion,
gives way to nature's normal passion:
But when the hour of youthful passion
at eighteen years, to some compassion.
My friends, the bard stirs your compassion:
But, even by accident, her passion
in terms of poetry or passion --
the foreign words a maiden's passion
pouted, and swore in furious passion
the sufferings of tempestuous passion;
this was the science of that passion
he's viewed the boxes without passion,
to battle further with my passion;
three carts - traditional procession --
when, in pale sky, the stars' procession
she wrote in French... what a confession!
''I write to you - no more confession
in casual letters of confession --
Well, I must make a frank confession,
As, lovingly, in his confession,
that virgin dream and its confession
will anger you in its confession.
I make magnanimous confession,
to sob out prayer, complaint, confession,
he failed to join that sharp profession
our kin are folk whom by profession
At feasts, though, full of pert aggression,
Bard13 of The Feasts, and heart's depression,
the fateful diet; by depression
a grain of gladness; tears' repression
There many pages keep the impression
Yet Tanya's note made its impression
''But, if you've kept some faint impression
Pleasant, in spite of its compression,
So let me with a kind expression
Vladimir's challenge found expression
in Russian never found expression,
What scorn I see in the expression
before such candour of expression,
the poet's heart found full expression,
how I interpret this expression:
ripen, and find a new expression --
On these, with something like obsession,
Shade-like, in purposeless obsession
Rage died, and jealousy's obsession,
how fearful, too, is my obsession
and tried to write, but a hard session
She loved the balcony, the session
with every sort of home possession:
Her feelings in their weary session
pours out its guiltless frank admission,
one listened to a chief of mission
his lyre, now stilled, in its high mission
before she goes, she seeks permission
A thinker in a desert mission,
Evgeny, whom the repercussion
nothing was barred beyond discussion --
a lady - what a grim discussion! --
As soon as he appears, discussion
Zaretsky rose without discussion;
your molten gold, your charmed infusion;
her discomposure, her confusion,
and plunged in tender shame's confusion,
an idle monk in glum seclusion,
The manor house, in deep seclusion,
I'll float in gondola's seclusion;
dear Tanya, lover of illusion;
What else? Quite drunk with love's illusion,
He followed them without illusion,
expose his soul to an intrusion
screened by a hill from storm's intrusion,
lost them without regret's contusion,
Her loving spouse with approbation
hell's terrifying imprecation:
at verse, and hiss an imprecation,
Idle again by dedication,
O Adrian waves, my invocation;
and all our modish education;
it mastered him in slow gradation;
Tatyana sees with trepidation
etcetera. But her trepidation
Seeing herself as a creation --
the millions of two-legged creation
of Eugene, cold as all creation,
have you read lines of your creation
the fleeting works of my creation,
She'll not see him, her obligation
Evgeny, hating litigation,
he strove to achieve the appropriation
in indescribable elation,
the prince bring up his own relation
of philosophic isolation,
our terror is their consolation.
rebuffed, found instant consolation;
that corps of social legislation --
a hideous deal of tribulation.
so, full of heart-felt tribulation,
This wearisome perambulation
in time (to quote the calculation
alone, and sunk in calculation,
Compliment and congratulation;
But here, with our congratulation
In Tanya, what a transformation!
to give you honest explanation.
Compassion, yes, and indignation,
To batten down their indignation
somehow have got the designation
secure a secret assignation,
pride's icy calm, the combination
and all our fresh imagination,
I'll gladden your imagination,
before his eyes, imagination
come, trouble my imagination,
thank God, he had no inclination
yet a capricious inclination,
too long, against my inclination,
Sign of the urge for domination:
And home was now their destination;
the coach has reached its destination;
I'm altering my destination
She struck one as the incarnation --
I know (and seek your exculpation)
but the salon's preoccupation
Even at home his occupation
then he'd implore a declaration,
Tatyana's name day celebration.
would have been spared this laceration.
Bards of our tearful generation,
where are distress, commiseration?
by writers of her admiration,
when our sublimest aspiration,
Napoleon's our sole inspiration;
where dwelt this child of inspiration,
Fired by the god of inspiration,
''Whose glance, provoking inspiration,
hear, once more filled with inspiration,
field-work, and walks with inspiration,
But come, thou youthful inspiration,
A moment earlier, inspiration
bitter-sweet glory's inspiration,
with careful schemes of decoration
of his Och&aacute;kov7 decoration!
with fond caress? whose adoration
Though belles had lost his adoration,
When progress and amelioration
She enjoys the stately orchestration
with a blunt cue for the duration,
and in the misted condensation
with our Mamas, and a sensation
it had no sparkle of sensation,
Then gradually upon sensation,
and logic; yet the conversation
To talk, to general conversation
this was our heroes' conversation
(I like a friendly conversation,
no mannerism, no affectation,
Left-handed from the habitation
the strangeness of her habitation,
Lost in our backwoods habitation
In time, who knows, the agitation
trusted her without hesitation,
''I?'' ''Saturday. The invitation
another bard1 in exaltation
you see, with tears and incantation
So to his wife for presentation
where fate had fixed our confrontation,
Of course. Yet fashion's wild rotation,
thrives to this moment, in a station
mother implored me; my sad station
how soon the bounds of rank and station
had filled this heart, and detestation
must be to hold in detestation
before the window taking station,
With mounts from home, or postal station,
&lt; My gaze pursues them... but on station
is where old master took up station,
And from the nearby Army station
The invalid's glad salutation,
When Eugene's turn for salutation
on words of foreign derivation,
finding in that no deprivation --
I pray God grant his soul salvation,
what kind of thought, what observation,
I thank him without reservation,
Tatyana listened with vexation
The kinsfolk in concerted action
of his intent; and a reaction
of childish pranks: a chilled reaction
for nature's unadorned reaction
The nervous-tragical reaction,
the quintessential reaction
by what's called machinal reaction,
the brilliant crackpot: this reaction
he read, and read - no satisfaction:
A pause of silence and inaction,
of Russian verse, its force in action, --
she can't make out a single fraction
with shelves of books deployed for action,
He gave his arm. In sad abstraction,
present her languor and distraction
Lensky all evening, in distraction,
had long proved tedious to distraction:
what dream accounts for her distraction?
Rousseau (forgive a short distraction)
Tatyana never knew the attraction
It's true, the magnet-like attraction
But you perhaps find no attraction
In time past, objects of affection
I grasp a stirrup with affection,
I gave no rein to sweet affection:
I feel a brotherly affection,
with such a blissful, brief infection --
Whatever in this rough confection
worthier of you in the perfection
showed one a pattern of perfection
the universe is all perfection;
arrested by the sheer perfection
and always the self-same objection;
on Eugene's lips. In his dejection,
for him all sham has found rejection,
I've drawn a plan and a projection,
and charming reverie's vain deflection
the man of reverie and reflection,
what holds her in profound reflection,
in simple but sublime reflection,
is lost in obstinate reflection;
almanacs, journals of reflection,
a dream's mute monument, reflection
Lending his tone a grave inflection,
He lacked the slightest predilection
what held me was my predilection,
To reading from this odd collection
But, as it is, this pied collection
He found them in some old collection,
absorbed me in the recollection
Another page of recollection:
then on the leaves of recollection,
you sought - tumultuous recollection,
he's gnawed by serpent Recollection,
but groomed an anecdote-collection
Poets, I'll say in this connection,
the books then underwent inspection...
Walking her horse in introspection
but looks and talk took the direction,
Dogs, howling, rushed in her direction...
I trust my fate to your direction,
all brought to life at your direction.
Reader, whatever fate's direction,
She wanders on without direction.
but where such hymns in my direction
how dull to work for the correction
All right, you want the resurrection
to undertake their resurrection,
''I've dreams and years past resurrection;
Meanwhile my novel's opening section
Tanya's distress had risked detection
giving the lady their protection,
I weep, and pray for your protection..,
there's far too much of contradiction,
drink in the midnight benediction,
in dreams and cards and their prediction,
my span, that fortune's jurisdiction
from gaol to greenwood, by such fiction
meticulously; in my fiction
I must wake up with the conviction
Tatyana shared with full conviction
it stood, defiant of destruction
The ch&acirc;teau was of a construction
I would have had the indiscretion
I know it's now in your discretion
How soft his glance, or at discretion
untouched by trace of inhibition,
into his look, the exhibition
I've learnt the voice of new ambition,
a joker in the old tradition,
The Larins kept the old tradition:
he changed the corv&eacute;e of tradition
the guardian angel of tradition,
the unmetric verses of tradition
only by rule, and strict tradition
a modish second-hand edition,
the modesty of her condition,
Tatyana, hiding her condition,
Perhaps to improve the world's condition,
those words where love, without condition,
she yields to it without condition
At this midnight of my condition,
or some vile agent of perdition
Fate saved Evgeny from perdition:
With spelling scrambled to perdition,
The flirt has reason's cool volition;
and yet a distant admonition
of the two girls; their premonition
His unexpected apparition,
Protect me from such apparition
what is he? Just an apparition,
was it not you, dear apparition,
I'm blind to every apparition;
a truly noble disposition;
methodical by disposition,
''Oh nurse, a favour, a petition...''
the first will never find fruition,
at first Madame gave him tuition,
Vladimir to this casual mention
and so he lacks the strength to mention
and then it's tea that comes to mention,
it's late, time's passing... not to mention,
but I've not got the least intention
She's paid the sunrise no attention,
What cause has won me your attention?
her husband's or the world's attention...
Now brooding thoughts hold his attention
he's bowed politely; his attention
Now, she devours, with what attention,
devoured a book with rapt attention,
and whisper ''Dunya, pay attention!''
he'll charm you with his fine invention,
and all their ravishing invention
Zaretsky draws up a convention
Could it not be that by convention
in our affair, the intervention
Deaf to her sister's intervention,
She went - and Eugene, all emotion,
our hapless Tanya! An emotion
Tatyana in a deep emotion
your tears would flow - but your emotion,
What sort of roses, in your notion,
she drinks it like a priceless potion;
of wild repentance and devotion
Eugene forsakes the packed reception,
By dreams now sad in their conception,
More tolerant in his conception
yet, as each rule has its exception,
then, on the last page, the suggestion:
though he's unknown, there's no suggestion
times were, when master's least suggestion...''
On the first sheet you'll find a question:
that he's not honest past all question.''
''Oh nyanya, nyanya, I don't question...
What folly! and what retribution!
he almost begs for absolution,
he looks, in sweet irresolution,
freedom and peace, in substitution
bribe-taker, glutton and buffoon.
that rogue, backbiter, pantaloon,
But now the radiance of the moon
thoughts of a girl, or as the moon
She was alone, lit by the moon.
a rogue, a slanderer, a poltroon,
good night; I swear I'll lie down soon.''
is dimmed. Down there the valley soon
young traitresses by the platoon,
by Scott, by Seneca, or Byron,
Byron
Escaped from social rhyme and reason,
to burn - and then by force of reason
Each day, despite the appeals of reason,
to demonstrate some signs of reason:
imagination, with such reason,
But what about Eugene? With reason
Like modish rhymes that lack all reason,
so, seeing there no rhyme or reason,
He's neither died, nor lost his reason,
of your slim prints! though this be treason
if I'd possessed the slightest reason
is a compulsive bore by reason
The days flew past; by now the season
How fearful, in and out of season
he drives up in and out of season
no meaning in or out of season,
At first I thought it out of season
By contrast, in the frozen season,
craving your tolerance in season --
burst to a fiery blaze in season?
In backwoods, how d'you pass this season?
I was Onegin's friend that season.
the roundest face that you've set eyes on,
''What, Grandison? oh, Grandison!
alone, with no adornment on;
invariably, as time went on,
a dumb moon, on a dumb horizon.''
a free romance's far horizon,
my disillusioned glass, and yearn,
became their scrutiny's concern.
something to fritter and to burn,
and it deceived us in return;
of fate, and life, each in its turn
that alien scene must I now turn
for friends of languor, or of fun,
products of carefree hours, of fun,
last night he'd erred in making fun,
a ball in Petersburg; but fun
and soon his travels had begun,
the festal name day has begun.
as battles go, I've not begun;
one sees a duck and aims his gun,
begs your indulgence - it's been spun
her heart had long been overrun:
don't judge the race before it's run --
from daybreak valleys lift the sun;
and paler than the moon at dawn,
and trembles like a hunted fawn.
for Olga, on the spreading lawn,
were from his vision quite withdrawn.
her little friends, Tatyana'd yawn,
onset of the incipient yawn,
due punishment was handed down
till he at last was summoned down
the branches all are weighted down
whose kindly hand will ruffle down
of Muses' offspring; sitting down
not every day could he wash down
the darling sex is light as down.
her head in modesty cast down,
sleep much, read little, and put down
the thought of volatile renown.
and lovelorn maiden whom he'd known,
if not slow-witted, might have known.
to bee and butterfly unknown.
moves the young watcher (as was known
and once again received a crown.
and at the altar, with a crown,
her to the altar and the crown.
the laurel in the old man's crown!
to vice, while virtue got its crown.
his beefsteak with champagne, or drown
and read the books there on her own.
would talk, keep silent, laugh, then frown --
in the full beauty of its frown;
can't really be: for we've outgrown
fits us as if it were our own?
has driven off, to find his own.
yet floods of talk around the town...
the latest fashions of the town;
to be the bride I'd call my own.
Imagine it: quite on my own
Onegin without more ado
she'd cheer my wordless way, and do
she did what nurse advised she do
''Just half a glass more... that will do...
Enough, I tell you, that will do --
the shepherd, as he used to do,
blooms when there's nothing else to do.
than what our sorrowing rhymesters do?
still meek, still deaf as howd'youdo,
a soul that perished long ago,
as instituted long ago.''
and roused the village long ago:
of language which, so long ago,
in Lyc&eacute;e gardens long ago,
since I stopped sinning years ago.
where did that glum eccentric go,
that self-same evening where he'd go.
as fast as post-horses could go,
she flies as fast as she can go;
''I think I'm happy.'' Time to go,
is that my feet lack strength to go
bed-time, and time for guests to go.
see with their jugs the milk-girls go
I married. I beseech you, go;
glitter and tumble as they go,
have drenched the steel bit as they go
a frequent question: ''tell me who
with a Venetian maiden who
was brought there by a huckster who
it will be our descendants who
thought them a pointless peccadillo;
sacred to children of Apollo!
''You know him, do you?'' ''Yes and no.''
or pine, persuade of yes or no,
and on the crumpled sofa too
and how's Tatyana? Olga too,
the hero's name's decided too.
of grammar, Russian language too.
Onegin sits at table too,
and ran far off... the Muse came too.
In such an album, friends, I too
her handkerchief has fallen too;
so pious, and so clever too,
out of this world will crowd us too.
can chatter, and be silent too,
let evening pass, tomorrow too --
but spared no glance for Cicero;
Who on earth is he? not... our hero?
like irksome phantoms, null as zero.
after that, supper's served, and so
they were her only food... and so
his conscience's record, and so
made all fates look the same... and so
with your good offices, and so
Enough, my friends; it's all so-so.
''This time I think you've been reduced to
''You yawn, Onegin?'' ''As I'm used to.''
Tatyana's heart is rent in two.
Chapter Two
still eats and drinks enough for two.
that night, in secret, set for two;
But dinner's served, so two by two
a quilted chamber-robe and cap.
punctilious in his cotton cap,
in flannel, and an old fur cap.
himself just like a simple chap.
and introduced, for the last lap,
the floor serves Triquet for his nap,
sometimes he'd fall into a trap
has opened up his serving-trap.
and all the world is buried deep.
land where my heart is buried deep.
mountains will part; below the deep,
the maidens all are slumbering deep.
the heartache that they bring lies deep.
''So let it be! for you to keep
Two hearts there are perhaps that keep
though cold I am and sad; in sleep
Only Tatyana does not sleep,
across each bush, across each steep,
land where I learned to love and weep,
henceforth in front of you I weep,
a tear for him... but what's to weep?
over the waters in a sweep;
she never even bit her lip.
upon her feverish tongue; the slip
and, any moment, down he'll slip.
the letter trembles in her grip;
taken the saucers in their grip,
paled, flushed, or lost composure's grip --
will find the ice elude his grip
bassoons and flutes begin to trip.
by judgement of the modern camp
song, laughter, whistle, bark and champ,
almost as good as a dim lamp.
and human words, and horse's stamp!
here's Petushk&oacute;v, the local fop;
a plain, unceremonious troop,
from thirty down to two; and stop,
with a small tray and a teacup.
of spires and belfries, in a cup
the wine-addict adores the cup:
wine of the Comet6 fills the cup;
recall, by its bewitching cup,
the joys of youth, that festal cup,
with sheer enchantment fills her cup!
their hand to grapple slander's cup,
my student cell: she opened up
he arrives - the cork goes flying up,
delicious novels, laps them up;
with parks and mansions, open up.
neighbours and friends in kindly group,
my last poor lepton for a sup!
''Get up, my child, it's time, get up!
in his defence, and smash it up;
with fright, she hears the approaching bear;
our friend Kat&eacute;nin8 brought to bear
oh, &agrave; propos: Larin's a dear
so Lensky answered the old dear:
sweet as a lover's kiss, and dear,
unseen, already you were dear,
ditty portends a loss; more dear
my golden days when spring was dear?
Those friends, those friends! it is, I fear,
The olden days, I want to hear...''
Never come and overhear
Sunk in dejection, she won't hear
''Look quickly to the left, d'you hear?''
by waters that were still and clear,
my soul had heard your voice ring clear,
as gay as morning and as clear,
an urge to sleep; soon, clear as clear,
villages flickered far and near,
for the first time the Muse came near.
Buy&aacute;nov tried - got flea in ear.
open the window, sit down near.''
the talk of guests when they appear;
Tatyana seeks to attune her ear,
at the same moment in her ear:
''How Tanya's grown! I pulled your ear
is ''Kit''3 to every maiden's ear.
to see the grave, and shed a tear.
how brilliant with its instant tear!
as linen's brought for him to wear.
the hunter in the wood will swear
This dear, still world I must forswear
would fill Tatyana from afar
when we see him from afar,
had been for ever borne off far
no, Tanya's more endearing far.
the lover of Julie Wolmar,3
and Malek Adel,4 de Linar,5
and soon they bring her... a guitar
In the dark sky, a shooting star
and parted from her by their star.
but your vile Helen's not my star --
complete with broad-brimmed bolivar,
and Dunya works the samovar;
''Here, near Saint Simeon; in December,
Grandison, cousin, d'you remember?''
comes for awakening, comes for slumber;
Whether the arrow has my number,
Back to his regiment the Lancer,
but here comes our loud-talking prancer
Don't let a ghost be your bear-leader,
myself and Eugene, lest a reader
your loved one, honourable reader!
of mocking turn, or else a breeder
in my long task, be my upholder,
Enough. The load is off my shoulder!
and yet in vain ennui I squander
in winter, on the cast-iron fender,
such careless language of surrender?
Who taught her an address so tender,
My love for it is just as tender,
''Could I just see the house, I wonder?''
''Can it be she?'' Eugene in wonder
I drag my footsteps hither, yonder;
that huge ballrooms vibrated under,
''She's mine!'' Evgeny's voice of thunder
Now the mazurka sounds. Its thunder
rushed to Anisia's room, to plunder
the whole thieves' kitchen flies asunder,
from deepest backwood, furthest under...''
her heart speaks to her even louder
Her passion burns with stronger powder
and from within come noise and cheer;
and exclamations, and good cheer.
word on his lips, and thought: it's sheer
ladies at the fireside confer,
sought in her book, that text of danger
who walks with sorrow, and with danger,
A backward look is fraught with danger;
roamed the still forest like a ranger,
but from her shaggy-liveried ranger
by fate's decree: this freakish stranger,
some future dunce will point a finger
then know that your reproving finger,
''I weep... In case there still should linger
perhaps - for flattering hope will linger --
Dawn comes in mist and chill; no longer
Tatyana now need wait no longer.
in pairs, their hunger driving stronger,
''this is the one!'' Ah, ever stronger,
what's more, I loved you; but my hunger,
''For then, Onegin, I was younger,
For it was custom that consoled her
soon a great truth came to enfold her
But where, mid tragic storms that rend her,
bound where the magic bow will send her,
Once Vy&aacute;zemsky,4 who chanced to find her
her soul's attention; just behind her
The city's early sounds awake her;
her heartache, did it long compel her,
''Olga,'' she thinks, ''what fate befell her?
To my astonishment I've seen her,
to a soir&eacute;e. ''My God! to her!...
around her neck, or when for her
into a corner, gently makes her
alone with him; Onegin takes her
She's in the wood, the bear still trails her.
now a protruding branch assails her
by magic everything instils her
all day, all night, his presence fills her,
Love passed, the Muse appeared, the weather
I walk the shore,17 I watch the weather,
hoar-frost and sun in freezing weather,
and after jealousy's grim weather
His life went sailing in calm weather;
still shivering in the bitter weather
No ice and flame, no stormy weather
to kissing or caressing father
After a fine career, his father
He gave three balls a year, and rather
she never joined, or skipped, but rather
Ladies came over, crossed to meet her,
the doorway opened wide to meet her,
At once Anisia came to greet her,
and bending deeply down to greet her
So, verse and prose, they came together.
Some neighbours there have come together;
now free, I once more weave together
a joking flirt, or both together,
I'll part them, bring them back together;
''Bliss was so near, so altogether
their lords, and thwack their palms together;
sledges, and tardy dawns together
sometimes the evening brought together
a wondrous tenderness. And whether
they talk of her, of how and whether:
is firmly cast. I don't know whether
has left, and no one here has met her...
She hesitates, and doubts beset her:
When comes my moment to untether?
Tatyana's here, you know I've brought her...''
And not because she'd read him, either,
Lovelace, or Grandison, or neither;
Hussars on leave are racing hither
Here insolent prize-dandies wither
grey Filatevna, to present her
''What nonsense, Tanya! in those other
Foes! Is it long since from each other
rendered them tedious to each other;
why, at the thought, my husband's mother
and in the role of virtuous mother
I would have found a friend, another,
''You pile one eclogue on another!
long since, like brother linked to brother,
became like brother knit to brother.
for God's sake, that will do. But, brother,
servant of God, and Brigadier.''
and more than once the German baker,
Necker
Drive on, Andryushka! quicker, quicker!
No moralizing from this joker;
without preliminary feeler
Pistols are out, they gleam, the hammer
faceted muzzles by the rammer;
while dear Tatyana's youth grows dimmer:
drive on! And now we see a-shimmer
and health, life's sweetness and its shimmer,
Farewell, Petrovsky Castle, glimmer
Our evanescent northern summer
who in the country spends her summer,
and the young city-bred newcomer,
it's like a vanishing newcomer --
He cursed Theocritus and Homer,
Gvozd&iacute;n, exemplary farmer,
Here with his wife, that bulging charmer,
but just to make the bargain keener,
When we've retreated to the banner
While under the connubial banner
exercised, under lucre's banner,
of passion's out, and its whole manner
a novel in Lafontaine's8 manner...
''Here in the winter he'd have dinner
he fed on hope's deceptive dinner;
I'll feed the journalists for dinner
I like to tell the time by dinner
Please follow me. And here's the inner
In heart's affairs, a sweet beginner,
and tea and supper; there's an inner
you newborn work, and like a winner
into the mud, a drunken goner,
unswerving friend, correct landowner,
Meanwhile another new landowner
Give me a pen and give me paper,
she never read a Russian paper,
bring up a table, and a taper;
of secrets, like a friend but dearer,
oh! her young dove, the natural hearer
it frankly, I'm a firm adorer
Eugene was free, and as a dresser
on cups of coffee, and then later
he'd swim this Hellespont; then later
two or three novels where our later
was G&ouml;ttingen, his alma mater,
of Neva's proud imperial water,
I'll sprinkle you with holy water,
Revenge's hour is near, and after
What do I want? what am I after,
''The one you love's the younger daughter?''
but the unbending goddess-daughter
or else a novel.'' ''And my daughter
''The Lord God be with you, my daughter!''
Evgeny, full of inward laughter,
each coldly plans the other's slaughter...
I know to what malicious laughter
like a drunk traveller in a shelter,
between two aunts, in pillared shelter,
Noise, laughter, bowing, helter-skelter
cold reason, sleep in sensual welter
Softly the door is opened, enter
panes patterned by the finest printer,
and hills that delicately winter
''Why not?'' ''I'd choose the other quarter
could they not give each other quarter
and so your faithfullest supporter
two poles that ice had glued like plaster
pale transcript of a vivid master,
spelt hazard, ruin and disaster;
fraught with enticement and disaster?
Longtime inside this modish cloister,
It's late. A breeze begins to roister,
just look, and never mind the chatter...
there was a general furtive chatter,
he fled from their resounding chatter!
that we enjoy equating chatter
No, incorrect and careless chatter,
true, with a pistol he could shatter
The world of fashion, prone to flatter,
''Look to the left? where? what's the matter?''
Conjecture found unending matter:
find, in the trivial, serious matter;
Their talk, so sound on every matter,
evoke emotion's pitter-patter,
of seeing the world? what on earth could be better?''
a blank default would suit me better.
with his forefathers would seem better;
No answer comes. He goes, for better
make Juvenal his text, or better
Who could have looked the poet better,
add vale when he signed a letter;
But go he won't: for him, a letter
No answer comes. Another letter
''Then send your grandson with this letter
But that's enough. My beauty's letter
still as a shadow, grim and bitter;
she found Evgeny, eyes a-glitter,
The night has many stars that glitter,
but brighter than the heavenly litter,
Tatyana's letter, treasured ever
''She's not in love?'' ''There's no one, ever.
so gloriously he'd fool the clever,
that raves with poetry can ever
''To...?'' ''Larina.'' ''Tatyana? never!''
to Evgeny. Oh, God, she'd never...
And yet that goddess whom I'd never
I read with secret pain, and never
And he was loved... at least he never
importune with my lyre, whenever
Present me, please.'' ''You're joking.'' ''Never.''
to it the people's blessing never
Russia's Terpsichore, shall never
And Ivan Petushk&oacute;v; no, never.
''Another!... No, another never
Ah, he had loved a love that never
Happy a hundredfold, whoever
your chorus, is it dead for ever?
Fare thee well, and if for ever,
maybe bore off with it for ever
Decreed in highest court for ever...
for me to glimpse this Phyllis ever
''You're married? No idea whatever...
Time was, he'd been the wittiest ever,
He asks. She can't accept. Why ever?
Onegin turns, and with a shiver
led to the princess, all a-shiver,
and put our heart into a shiver
and so in winter-fields will shiver
that fell, and then began to shiver,
even in joke the heart won't shiver.
glitters beneath its icing-sliver;
from drowning's death in Lethe river
Like modish parquetry, the river
toward the neighbouring valley's river.
Killed!... At this frightful word a-quiver,
And someone's heart will feel a quiver,
Perhaps, when thoughts are all a-quiver
he's up the steps, with heart a-quiver
not once a day a thought will quiver,
So the poor butterfly will quiver
her face would pale, she'd start to quiver.
dip in their jugs; where shadows quiver
with an obeisance I'll hand over...
There sings the nightingale, spring's lover,
on Finland's coast a lonely rover --
with brilliant conquests by the shower,
squeezes her hand - and brings to flower
You too, prime beauties in your flower
his freedom, in his youth's first flower,
no fuss; our belly has the power
not separation's chilling power,
by drozhkies jaunting at full power
so nearly had them in his power.
Lensky at home awaits the answer,
Presently Olga's ringing answer
to encase herself inside a layer
to whisper it her inmost prayer.
he's at the club, a real stayer,
she's up and flying through the air
don't waste your efforts on the air.
Moscow's the place, the marriage-fair!
the moon in its azure of air.
they shove each plate, and every chair,
the girl's pale charms, her loosened hair,
a deft arrangement to his hair,
and shout, and make room for the pair.
or did her grief soon find repair?
exists for me one special pair!
deaf to the voice of your despair?
her heart had spoken, free as air,
of Twelfth Night's chillest, iciest air.
in, past concierge, up marble stair
it's yes or no, but never sir.''
I'll go, I'll go!'' - and in a stir
no, nothing caused his heart to stir,
Our love is what they most abhor;
but, when he'd rushed to Uncle's manor,
the cabinet behind the door
he carries her inside the door
November stood outside the door.
all stand. He walks towards the door.
''She knows you?'' ''Why, we lived next door.''
the logs; the wild ones have the floor;
from table, clattering on the floor;
and sets her gently on the floor.
however scarlet; free from error
To me, unsmiling lips bring terror,
Who'll never fault our vices, or
made London's dandy his professor.
lightly attired, like the creator
Vladimir Lensky, whose creator
Don Juan's and the Giaour's creator,
He's off - this ruthless legislator
he'd listen to the administrator;
''My sweet, God warrants me your debtor.''
for the footlights, this fickle traitor
simple old lady; but the liquor --
in corners whispering girls concur;
touches her hand, or throws a fur
and nothing pierced his senses' blur.
The vote was passed without demur.
and looked for Lensky, while the labour
Let's go, our friendship's worth the labour!''
or, after some dull dinner's labour,
I buttonhole a wandering neighbour
Olinka yawned, just like her neighbour,
by way of toast to their fair neighbour;
the linen stretched on the tambour.
Then with a half-ethereal splendour,
and brandishes her tinsel splendour
Chapter Four
are treated to the fullest rigour
''Let's go.'' The friends, all haste and vigour,
whispers some ballad of the hour,
clock in the country rings the hour;
one customary grief each hour!
my inept pupil, at that hour,
Exhausted by the ballroom's clamour,
he sleeps, away from glare and glamour,
I'd nothing to attract your humour...
''Then, in the backwoods, far from rumour
No, soon she changed her old demeanour:
having by her severe demeanour
like Regulus, that god of honour,
her Russian was as thin as vapour,
to liven with a silk atour
Now Latin's gone quite out of favour;
of the dull shores of my disfavour,
Onegin knew enough to savour
to mourn for Russia's gloomy savour,
beneath bird-cherries and acacias
with her own forests and her meads...
But the swift summer-time proceeds --
with tears, in quarters of the maids:
the valley's dark. The forest lands
as if spellbound, Tatyana stands.
insists, when the mazurka ends,
and neighbours, followed the same ends.
and tedious means to festive ends.
forgot to think of town and friends
dear companions, darling friends,
on most occasions between friends,
for them by fathers who, as friends
By enemies, no less by friends
on this unstable life, my friends!
I prize the attention of my friends,
and by Repentance. All this lends,
persisted and made no amends.
on the cotillion, as amends.
could have been turned to worthier ends --
I know too surely how it ends.
she lost the language of the gods
for the bleak tongue of boorish clods --
mills, lands and waters - he whose goods
the total ownership of woods,
no mansions, no ballrooms, no bards.
a fop, a punter on the cards,
although there are no streets, no cards,
and junior Ensign in the Guards.
and trains a mirror till it faces
in country towns and suchlike places
goes out into the courtyard spaces
And in their daughters' close embraces
at first by Moscow's youthful graces
as fresh as ever, for its graces
Lord Byron, with his shrewd caprices,
to all the most adored actrices,
with bended knees a windmill dances,
From early on she loved romances,
recalling earlier time's romances,
its sails go flap-flap as it prances;
to expose to Moscow fops and Circes
but in Zaretsky he induces
and, in the yard, stand eighteen jades.
fieldward, in noisy swarm, the bees.
There's powdery snow up to her knees;
till Moscow, meekly on its knees,
and ananas, the gold of trees.
and clasps her neck; and now she sees
and feather-beds, and birds in cages,
But now our roads are bad, the ages
the prejudices of the ages,
(vain twaddle, fables of the ages,
Love tyrannises all the ages;
with broods of children of all ages,
sensitive ladies of all ages --
the secrets of the grave, the pages
Of those who heard my opening pages
but in it there are certain pages
a blessing from its blasts and rages,
as Sadi17 sang in earlier ages,
There's din of parting now that rages,
and the Skot&iacute;nins, grizzled sages,
Priam-like agricultural sages,
and bedbug that infest the stages
parks, monasteries, towers and ledges,
peasants, and fashion-shops, and sledges,
a rest from toil and all its aches,
the jams appear in little dishes;
The protocol is all one wishes:
she fell in love with all the fancies
of Dian's visage, in our fancies
her out-of-fashion clothes!... oh, mercies!
upon her lips the breathing dies,
and almost swoons, and almost dies.
of swooning, Tanya nearly dies;
just what the nightmare signifies.
All are dumbfounded. Lensky shies
damns the intruders; Tanya lies
through the back porch runs out and flies
look through the pane, and squash the flies.
is there to lisp its pack of lies.
(the reader thinks the rhyme is lilies:
the prince looks at him, and replies:
cheek upon hand she softly cries
in a still stream that never dries.
cherries throw and raspberries
and other, more exacting worries,
My pen, as once, no longer hurries
plagued by her ghastly dream, and tries
by any itch for marriage ties;
resigned himself to prison's ties,
of goblets, tall and slender pretties;
you object of my guileless ditties!
Of course, the love of tender beauties,
that generations of new beauties,
that verse will turn to useful duties;
will loyally discharge its duties,
or just grammatical mistakes,
brushes on thirty different scales;
lies in a coverlet that ripples
She's here, she spreads abroad; she stipples
his wit, according to the rules
using overt or covert rules.
the horns, and the moustachio'd nozzles --
the eyes of all, the hooves, the snozzles,
how many lines of verse, and themes
and tea's brought in. Instead of chimes
for whom, to expiate your crimes,
eight rubbers; and by now eight times
you've made so many secret rhymes,
Ah, gently, gently, easy goes --
But friendship, as between our heroes,
to comfort her in all her woes,
its views, its passions, or its cares!
Triquet, ingenious poet, dares
although one in no manner shares
The crush, the heat, as music blares,
Europe's most finely chiselled wares
and jam in jars, and household wares,
across the drift-encumbered acres,
to me so simply, with the fires
and force that purity inspires,
the guests squeeze closer to the centres;
calm men with beatific features,
It's time: kind-hearted, idle creatures,
Melmoth,7 whose roaming never ceases,
twirls the other slowly as she pleases,
with eyes aflame Onegin rises
but then a sudden breeze surprises,
frightening with all despair's disguises,
La morale est dans la nature des choses.
as smoke in azure sky disperses.
addressed to Tanya, certain verses
no one recalls him or his verses;
inside a pocket Triquet nurses,
Here, in his red peruke and glasses,
behind the door the clash of glasses
blush to descry in looking-glasses
straight to his stall, then turns his glasses
High rank, of course, and fashion's glasses,
his thrusting horns, and as he passes
has come with Kharlikov; he passes
Applause. Onegin enters - passes
Tatyana looks, her faintness passes:
the inevitable silly asses,
Each others' and their own successes,
the beauties in their flimsy dresses,
and so the harmless chat progresses
the swarm, the glittering mob that presses,
in Olga everything expresses --
the skyblue eyes, the flaxen tresses,
Young ladies jump for future blisses...
the footmen sleep on the pelisses;
this denizen of the coulisses
round Tanya congregate the misses,
Onegin comes, and makes excuses;
Along the fronts of darkened houses,
What? Invitations? Yes, three houses
Some days he's still in bed, and drowses,
along the street where slumber drowses,
for the two ladies at the gates.
menu, hung up for show, excites
the thoughts of my two anchorites.
all sorts of hopeless appetites;
To live, it hurries, and to feel it hastes.
''Qu'&eacute;crirez-vous sur ces tablettes?''
in sledded coaches and coup&eacute;s,
the children spoilt, the mad, the rogues
critics and their capricious vogues,
an album's loose and floating sheaves.
to lie down at her feet like slaves!
how envious was I of the waves
is only Olga: he relieves
for Olga's beauty, Lensky gives
that fills him and in which he lives.
like a majestic moon, she drives
while roar of violins contrives
among the maidens and the wives,
to drown the hiss of modish wives.
away from trusting his own eyes.
down to the garden, and her eyes
and, scroll in hand, before her eyes
noise in her ears, glare in her eyes...
stripping my soul before your eyes!
of kindling smiles in ladies' eyes.
when our Zaretsky met his eyes.
like fluff before Aeolian breezes;
How well he donned new shapes and sizes --
in britzkas, kib&iacute;tkas and sleighs.
frontwise and back, that way and this.
you learn life's sweetness, and with this
then quickly something changed all this:
I've learnt new sadness; but in this
their breed would (some years after this)
I find no sense; the truth is this,
Hoar-frost that crackles with a will is
shall I see you?'' As Tanya speaks
Bokharans, orchards, merchants, shacks,
that ardent youth entirely lacks;
it blabs, and spills them in its tracks.
boulevards, chemists, and Cossacks,
the tears in stream pour down her cheeks.
haphazard; so, to God be thanks,
frost gleams. We watch with gleeful thanks
old mother winter at her pranks.
to pass for cultured in our ranks.
entered his sentence in the books.
nor will my scribbling in such books
unanimous exchange of looks
nonsense will earn indulgent looks,
some disagreeable remarks.
the modish Record Office clerks
brings out its faro pack, and deals.
to scorn the men with whom he deals;
and thought, a sleepy numbness steals;
And so they lived, two ageing mortals,
into the tomb's wide open portals,
ghostlike, must trouble him who feels --
the country cottages and hovels,
to her flower-garden, to her novels, --
the tusks, the corpse's finger-nails,
brushes for teeth, brushes for nails.
the bleeding tongues, the tufted tails,
and that embittered mind which boils
in empty deeds and futile toils.
and hetman of the gambling-halls,
''Come to me in my golden halls.''
boys, country women, stately halls,
the boxes; boiling, pit and stalls;
Street lamps go flashing by, and stalls,
in boxes or the rows of stalls.
or quizzing-glasses of know-alls
the early pealing of the bells
lifts her from bed as it foretells
the snow from all surrounding hills;
down to the plain in turbid rills.
so brilliantly he'd hoax the fools,
but whispers, the guffaw of fools...''
feeling is quaint, and fit for fools.
for us are instruments and tools;
The Song of the Girls
the ring of marriageable girls --
bludgeon the sense; it faints and whirls.
then, help me God, she caterwauls:
Zar&eacute;tsky, sometime king of brawls
and up the rustling curtain crawls.
in limpid verse that lives and gleams.
and life celestial's phantom gleams,
Russia's old glories and their gleams,
stuff of the poet's hallowed dreams!
the heart and all its fragile dreams.
I'm wandering in a world of dreams...
O, never know these frightful dreams,
your soul displays, in holy dreams,
for jokes, and rows, and merry dreams!
to sleep some black and empty dreams;
there's no ignoble tale that seems
''Ah, Tanya, come to me, it seems
while odes have high and noble aims...''
empty the purpose it proclaims,
in dream toward the woods and plains,
the funeral monument explains:
above the dust of his remains
of Bogdan&oacute;vich's11 refrains.
she finds it stifling here... she strains
as youthful sinning, or the strains
And of the cupboards, one contains
and says: ''Farewell, you vales and fountains!
farewell you too, familiar mountains!
no trace of ink, no spots, no stains.
the Muses' lofty arts and fashions,
for the sublime, and for the passions
Alone amid all his possessions,
it led him, in these early sessions,
for 1808: his obligations
the legatee of his relations --
a book of household calculations,
of reason's icy intimations,
the safest place for declarations,
In days of carefree aspirations,
of sleeplessness, faint inspirations,
Such were a young rake's meditations --
a Russian family's old traditions;
Legends, and mystical traditions,
No secret crimes, and no perditions,
rumours and threats and premonitions,
poor Tanya more intensely burns;
sleep runs from her, she turns and turns...
old prejudice; all men are zeros,
an ode in twenty-five cantos.
its pristine charm: heeltaps, and leaps,
I thought, she'll go this time, perhaps;
and whiskers - all of this it keeps
like native idiom from their lips?
and it's the foreign phrase that trips
of ladies and of freakish fops.
project in silhouette the tops
beds, bridges, lawn, she never stops,
that lives, and glitters, and endears,
I'll set two ages by the ears.
threats, vows, and simulated fears,
the friends' salute she never hears
but hold my tongue, lest it appears
and soon, oh soon the storm's arrears
by six-page letters, rings and tears,
I'm grieving still, but no more tears,
and than these letters, and these tears.
and from her eyes the eager tears
At least you then showed for my years
the odious bear still grunts and lumbers.
Ahead of them a pinewood slumbers
lorgnettes of jealous fashion-leaders,
to happen long ago, dear readers,
am I estranged, does all that cheers,
across the public's toes; he steers
But now Aurora's crimson fingers
the morning light no longer lingers,
retired, forgotten by his brothers,
passion's rough language talked by others,
on unknown ladies in the tiers;
a raging torrent, capped with breakers,
Evening, and darkening sky, and waters
Then doors are opened, Lensky enters,
The choirs of dancers sought their quarters.
they're all chained up in different fetters,
He'd given up girls - now gave up letters,
what occupied his chafing powers
printed among outmoded airs;
pans, mattresses, and trunks, and chairs,
a Russian hammer-blow, repairs
flicker of swiftly twirling pairs,
a fashion-plate for illustrators,
another of the ball-dictators,
watched sun and clock - then by such labours
Just before dinner, from his labours
defeated, turned up at his neighbour's.
he rested - wept for by his neighbours,
throughout the boredom of the hours --
still dim, through crystal's magic glass,
the moon; but in the darkened glass
with the resounding chime of glass.
he'll spend before the looking-glass,
the winter's ways are smooth as glass.
the only face to shake and pass
then from his cabinet he'll pass
before my gaze began to pass.
how pleasantly the stages pass.
jaws masticate as minutes pass:
no proud pretentions to success,
and locked him in a dark recess.
adorns Aunt Helen, the princess;
and from the salon the princess,
and friend Evgeny. The princess
the imperturbable princess.
I love their feet - though I confess
gazes at him... and nonetheless,
a shadow, null and meaningless,
in fact a thorough fop, no less.
We all resemble more or less
feeling to what had long been heartless:
with an avowal just as artless;
the crush, the glitter and the gladness,
These days I'm finding even gladness,
Christmas came on. What joy, what gladness!
the atmosphere of youth and madness,
I suffered once from all the madness
no, all devoured by passion's madness
Yes, youth divines, in giddy madness,
you age, and life's just grief and sadness...''
No one's, I swear by God! in sadness
that youthful soul, which pined for sadness;
at least by a regretful kindness;
I've seen how, trustful in his blindness,
Full of obedience and demureness,
poetic in her simple pureness,
with passion and with shrewd obliqueness
across our snows of northern bleakness
Nursed in the orient's languid weakness,
stalking the momentary weakness,
the party waits. Seized with an illness
is on his feet - in utter stillness
for you, I think, the humble dimness
that could sustain it? Only grimness;
There, with epigrammatic neatness,
where (standard rhyme) are youth and fleetness?
against the tea's excessive sweetness,
O dreams, o dreams, where is your sweetness?
at a friend's word, a girl's caress.
he doesn't hear when I address
an elegy to her address,
bespectacled, in tattered dress;
the ladies' calculated dress;
then dress...
by now he's driving home to dress.
or kiss the border of her dress.
a Muscovite in Harold's dress,
Eugene's a pedant in his dress,
but Eugene's out from din and press:
no haughty stare around the press,
propped in the door among the press.
they all still keep their old impress:
to play with a dishevelled tress,
and racking with their strain and stress
his soul with murmurs of distress.
tracked him, and put him in duress,
Alas, it's not so hard to guess!
it's not in him to bring me bliss.''
evoke for you a sombre bliss;
doubted of it, so lived in bliss.
the earlier griefs are what I miss.
look here, as a provincial miss
can lean on faith, who can dismiss
the album of a country miss
or make men seriously discuss
''You criticize Moscow? why make such a fuss
(my tale's beginning here repeats);
Strike the ditty up, my sweets,
Onegin spoke about its flights
the matchwood chatters as it lights.
she spins and, friend of winter nights,
to wave farewell the household waits
in sighs and boredom and deceits
The yard was bursting with dependants;
friends, foes, priests, guests, inured attendants
Lensky disliked the entertainments
But in that desert his attainments
she visited the humble tents
its glaring feasts, and shrill events,
in that one sound, for Russian hearts!
what store of riches it imparts!
and, on the crosses, jackdaw hosts.
lions adorning gateway posts
aged Derzh&aacute;vin1 saw and blessed us
And with a smile the world caressed us:
But when a later age has found us,
Who'll sow no calumnies around us?
as when chill autumn rains surround us,
Whose fond attentions will astound us?
by dull eternity's purlieus,
''A place where you'll find none of us.''
if I show wit in jesting thus.
for planting cabbage, like Horatius,
in indolence and in rampageous
Let me look back. Farewell, umbrageous
He was the slave of a tenacious,
and in the eyes of the judicious
and now it's Bordeaux the Judicious
Is it that we've become officious
Yet hissing froth deals a malicious,
To be a butt for the malicious
in rose-trimmed bonnets, but malicious;
I still find Gallicism delicious
ladies of riper years, delicious
we'll go with her to that delicious
and though my muse may be capricious,
too weak to change, I'm staying vicious,
However has he earned so vicious,
your heroes, raging and ferocious,
your battles, lawless and atrocious,
And what's more, they're so supercilious,
so circumspect, and so punctilious,
and act the humble or imperious,
For goodness' sake, you can't be serious
my task, so vivid and so serious
the indifferent, or the deadly serious!
And my companion, so mysterious,
''At the Larins'!'' ''But how mysterious.
in albums, blunted the censorious
There was - --,10 so notorious
of useful objects that the curious
of sudden brightness... it's too curious...
eyes rolling, arms uplifted, furious,
or for the modishly luxurious --
(an attribute that's quite vexatious,
attract the sneering of the jealous,
convinced at heart that my most zealous
fixing an early rendezvous
O rus!
even in novels, vice entraps us,
Today a mental fog enwraps us,
We must confess that taste deserts us
culture, so far from healing, hurts us;
(it's all the same - you well correct us),
but from our friends, good Lord protect us!
the bear has raised her in his paws;
no move she makes, no breath she draws;
at this betrayal's fateful news?
girl reapers as the streamlet flows
till now our language - proud, God knows --
yes, even there its triumph grows.
as fate's mysterious purpose burrows,
reap a brief harvest on their furrows;
its newness with our faded days,
those monkeys of the good old days:
of Moscow in the mournful days
the simple faith of olden days
right from the cradle of her days;
inherited from earlier days
and rest myself from earlier days.
to the beginning of our days.
as the perfection of our days!
that once I spent my happiest days?
''No, every minute of my days,
The comrade of so many days,
sweet talk with friends. How many days
sit on a flimsy bench, and lays
and on her lips a light smile plays.
another, freakish one, who stays
and on her cheeks the fever stays,
such shadowy and leisured ways,
of absence on my wandering ways!
will blossom into splendid highways:
she blossomed in the graceful ways
what moves along the hidden ways
yes, these were our forefathers' ways,
I shall set out on brand-new ways
five hundred years) for sure our byways
But he, by sad and rocky ways,
for dance, and din, and worldly ways,
oblivion of life's stormy ways,
adorning all its country ways.
gave up the ancient Kremlin-keys:
objective of his thoughts and joys:
thank you for suffering and its joys,
and by the sound of silly joys.
the big room, further, not a cat.
the new ballet he should be at.
she'll spin this way and that, and beat
has fixed; but for my heart to beat
who on a deuce, that famous cheat,
Tsimlyansky wine, between the meat
It baffles me. But I'll repeat
of Tanya's image... Ah, how great
no, forests are the sole retreat
and every plea that lips can treat;
The World found this enough to treat
has never staked his family seat.
came driving to his country seat,
fire of the cutlets' scalding fat,
(a simile of this and that)
killing each evening off like that?''
quickly to O... I mean to that...
so all went smoothly after that.
He opens up a door. What's that
the gift of recognizing what
and sang me to the altar-mat.
in which, dear friends, we're all afloat!
the neighbour... you must tell the brat
and ruled him like an autocrat --
''You're wrong.'' ''But what I wonder at
it held me captive; tit for tat,
by clearing every sort of debt;
sent to seduce? Resolve my doubt.
but held up by the simple fact
with pleasure on his vengeful act.
to catch the eye and to attract.
you loved the opulent contact
the marriage plans were all exact
Now Nature's tremulous, pale effect
on me, all this has no effect:
tradition still keeps my respect.
rigorously though you'd inspect --
and yet in her you'd not detect --
against each other swift, small feet.
are just as nimble as their feet.
to clasp your knees, and at your feet
of ladies' heads, and ladies' feet;
But now! what brings you to my feet?
of certain ladies' tiny feet.
and the blancmanger, then a fleet
that somehow that same day we'll meet...
not only pain, too much to meet...
in the salon new faces meet,
and kisses smack as young girls greet;
is it that she, poor simple sweet,
Eugene as clever, and quite sweet.
or of Ist&oacute;mina, my sweet,
on her conquest, we leave my sweet;
I'm good for nothing now, my sweet...
to hear him howl: ''that's me!'' You'll get
who, in good time, would calmly get
And he remembers, in the quiet
first, we'll take vanity, and let
across the stage; he yawns: ''Ballet --
still made of tulle, the self-same bonnet
we'll draw it deeper in our net;
and enviable for a poet,
no magic fancies of the poet,
in frosted bottle, for the poet
the one who killed the youthful poet?''
may wind up my career as poet;
I ask you, each and every poet!
prince, who in that dark-red b&eacute;ret,
not to see Olga; in a fret
after her own room, makes her fret.
youth which has nothing to regret,
Already borne down by regret,
all others with a waistcoat's set
Then verdicts from her husband's quartet
his itching verse, Monsieur Triquet
late of Tambov, Monsieur Triquet
ladies who glide on waxed parquet.
on ballroom's looking-glass parquet
her kindness, move Tatyana; yet
demanded. ''Yes, she looks... And yet...
and then concludes: she loves him yet!
before which life's horizon yet
and watch your daughters closer yet,
his foolish face; more pleasant yet
blue smoke of chimneys goes aloft,
shutters are opened and the soft
my word; no welshing, as I live. &gt;
all of an emptiness so killing - &gt;
and good and bad are all mixed up. &gt;
your heels will squash the ladies' toes! &gt;
shine out and bring the world to bliss. &gt;2
... &gt;2
Chapter Eight
her nerves, she leant on it her weight,
get two young friends to pick a fight,
shall my sad gaze no more alight
in their gay glass, the borrowed light
this child of luxury and delight.
They will receive us with delight.''
in winter was her heart's delight.
Tatyana'd rise by candlelight.
her path a hare in headlong flight
again I see your soulful flight?
he drives there like a bird in flight,
bathed in the moon's inspiring light.
she looks, the room is getting light --
the stars, the moon - celestial light
of distant countries, of moonlight...
in the mazurka he was light,
to steal away her neighbour's light
or dim her, dazzle as she might.
just like a casual guest who might
would Hymen bring us - blooms that might
In second place the poet might
last many a day, and many a night!
with visions of enchanted night,
converting morning to midnight,
solitude, stillness and the night,
in the deep stillness of the night,
outside and in they star the night;
once more he can't await the night;
seacoast, to hear in dark of night
in fashion's din, at still of night,
wakened at the same hour of night
''Gladly.'' ''So when?'' ''Why not tonight?
by Neva, on a summer night,
the happenings of the previous night;
to horror-stories told at night
found for its utterance that night.
their hopes, their pranks, their dreams at night --
My early bird! you know, last night
a simple Russian family night:
have been a fool; yet he'd a right,
still everywhere the lamps are bright;
saw through the window, morning-bright,
that Menelaus was quite right --
ran through the fields, sheer panic fright
come to disturb me and affright.
you gave me such a shocking fright!
Tanya comes to in utter fright...
in first place - listen, am I right? --
Where are you? come - and my own right
once more, at that beloved sight,
may chorus, when she comes in sight,
should have been analysed when caught,
and beat a nacreous wing when caught
blest... though perhaps her fancy's caught
now sweet, his slumbers are distraught.
repeats what her mama has taught.
and your sincerity of thought
one leads the multitude in thought,
and home he drives, deep-sunk in thought.
to drain its beaker down, nor thought
and prone to censure in our thought;
in fact by some quite different thought.
is dear to me, for it has brought
of life's repast betimes, nor sought
and with a halting, trembling gait
Then, crying, they untwined my plait,
can it be true you must await
of fallen glory. Well! don't wait,
from day to day she could but wait;
choruses, Tanya can but wait,
when hourly we ourselves betrayed it,
and every man won't understand it
or else... or else, may God forfend it!
You too, mamas, I pray attend it,
and has no knowledge of deceit?
their looks and language in deceit
Alas, our youth was what we made it,
some minutes long. The words won't fit
with trees decked in their silvery kit,
and jolly magpies on the flit,
with cranium aching fit to split;
and with a sigh I now admit
the homely scene, take pleasure in it --
there's a small window shining in it,
you're sure to find her portrait in it:
Their look, though, shows no change upon it --
with censure - I've done all to earn it!
My heart awaits you: you can turn it
Tatyana3 was her name... I own it,
but it's the first time you'll have known it,
I have to drag my feet to it.
and, when one's least prepared for it
their tendency to call, and sit.
or languid bosoms; and no visit
of simple product supplements it.
a nation's wealth is, what augments it,
finds her alone, and there they sit
''I don't see what's so bad about it.''
''Your modish world, I'll do without it;
and good and ill, and learning's fruit,
in his first dream of passion's fruit,
of sumptuous flowers and luscious fruit.
frozen in his tight-fitting suit;
on state affairs; there was a wit,
full of his usual pith and wit,
The book displayed, not so you'd know it,
flown from society as we know it,
in your pursuit I've come to know it:
In this, dear reader, if you know it,
the darling objects - don't you know it? --
darkly above the water's lilt,
a simple monument is built.
From widow Clicquot and from Mo&euml;t,
&lt; ...
without a word Tatyana leant
Believe (as conscience is my warrant),
With a sharp epigram it's pleasant
What of it? it's euphonious, pleasant,
the girl's attentive eyes are bent.
upon it, and with head down-bent
where a sharp nail has made a dent.
of rugs, and carpets' rich refinement.
and fatherland and grim confinement?
condemns the monde and its excitement;
Tanya looks on; her own indictment
Listen to me without resentment:
girls often change to their contentment
before first light they have appointment,
smoothe his way out with humour's ointment.
The rustic sage, in that apartment,
his housekeeper and her department
to freedom, softness and enjoyment:
and gave our heroine enjoyment
Or from all notion of enjoyment
and in retreat from all enjoyment
and every day its own enjoyment?
Heedless of the proud world's enjoyment,
its work, its torture, its enjoyment,
now crush with sorrow's dull deployment
Worse luck, Larina crawled; the employment
his young heyday's supreme employment,
he ended even your employment;
But was it happy, his employment,
Was it not in such sweet employment
and only wish that my employment
that's where my years of youth were spent.
but where are all your evenings spent?''
wedlock for us would be abhorrent.
and, as observer, to be present
and yet inseparably present,
Olinka and her mother sent:
active, and hopeful, and insistent:
remains unmoved: still he's persistent,
there, where the coulisse entrance went,
''Goodbye, Onegin, time I went.''
It's right and proper that you went.''
poor girl, to drop into a faint,
but will, and reason's strong constraint,
what flowers of spring display your dint?
madman, can you forget their print?
its grip on him, forgot to count
unconsciously he let it mount
our deep economist had got
and satisfied with what he'd got,
into a small quit-rent - and got
a glossary of smart argot...
and I be by the world forgot;
This world's so vacuous that it's got
''One winter's worth, you've surely got;
from their own country? Then she shot
and just a double charge of shot
of social buzz and modish riot,
and, curious now about the lot,
made over to them his whole lot,
my life in a domestic plot;
she roams the empty garden-plot...
without a trace of spite or plot,
his serfs rejoicing at their lot.
will in a flash decide his lot.
opens the door a tiny slot...
husband and father as my lot;
attainable!... But now my lot
or borrow, say, from me, if not.''
and where had he arrived from, not
I acted thoughtlessly or not:
by decent company, has not,
in everything she sees there's not
but, lovely maiden, wilt thou not
of the Terpsichorean foot.
the vital force gives them the shoot
I'll save this blossom on the shoot,
two pines have tangled at the root;
shall not attack my lily's root;
no spark of fun in all its rot!
Madame de Sta&euml;l, Bichat,13 Tissot,14
to pass the evening. No? then tot
and cared not what his daughter kept
a young girl's looking-glass is kept.
Now all was still. Tatyana slept.
by way of secret tome that slept
and sat there as the minutes crept;
the world and all its works, she wept
I've paid my due to classic art:
fly to my corner like a dart,
they'd just enrage it with their dart.
it lacked, of course, poetic heart,
the blood within my withered heart,
they shared their days in deed and heart,
a full confession of the heart.
the wilful fancies of the heart.
through distant regions of the heart...
my tongue kept drawing from the heart --
with bursts of passion from the heart,
At first, disparity of heart
as if a cold hand squeezed her heart,
She looked across, felt in her heart
wound that had seared my Tanya's heart!
one thing inspired his breath, his heart,
Evgeny loved him from his heart,
the uncertainties within his heart;
my wretched Lensky in his heart
by my Eugene, not for his heart,
o fields - to you I'm vowed at heart.
to all this tattle, yet at heart
in the far backwoods' deepest heart,
but now I've rather lost the art.
in all the world could take my heart!
liven the drowsing of my heart,
your grief would fail to touch my heart,
I'm grateful now with all my heart.
of hope sometimes disturbs my heart;
and fastens, like a term of art,
for him, the objective on life's chart
sing God knows whom, compose with art
sharpness of wit, and social art,
once more the love, once more the smart...
that Lensky and Eugene, apart,
''Go, nurse, and leave me here apart.
in showing how to tell apart
the lust for blood drew them apart?
and granite, were so far apart.
heaven's will - for you I'm set apart;
it would be painful to depart
despite herself, rehearsed the part:
was just created for the part.
you took an honourable part --
Tatyana hears but takes no part;
of sense and judgement. For his part
and should have played a different part:
and self-oblivion was his art!
it may be late, but it's a start.
in solitude, as at the start
a faster, stronger pulsing start.
of jealousy has made her start,
the wild rose blooms, and in the covert
the heart of the professional flirt!
or Russia's chondria, for short;
so unforgiving a report?
that, for all this, my shame's report
and to it, with a grave import,
one finds in war amusing sport,
by some perverse schoolboy for sport;
how well he knew the way to hurt --
earn us the favour of the Court?
and plaits a piebald shoe of bast;
passion and dreams of pensive cast.
dreams of inconsequential cast,
and faithful wife I'd have been cast.
in your cal&egrave;che of foreign cast --
the two foes stand with eyes downcast.
in which his hero's mould was cast.
as well-read, though of pedant cast.
need not have bristled like a beast;
and when, by misty moon, the east
study where he would sleep and feast
to each and every raving feast
that youthful heart. ''But now at least
for her instruction, and her breast
she sits with head sunk on her breast,
she treads our earth, and how her breast
another's joy, another's breast,
now as before, inside my breast;
the hostess cries and, moving fast,
amidst the howling and the blast
has felt time's desiccating blast?
with sabre's slash, and bullet's blast.
with Guillot; while pourparlers last
Onegin too. ''Good Lord, at last!''
sorceress-winter's here at last.
sing about something else at last!''
yet he fell out of love at last
can it be true, their crown at last
for the young pilgrim. So at last
takes up an hour or two; at last
all's well; the destined hour at last
drawn from a dim, warm-hearted past,
the ardent author of the past
about what's buried in the past:
after Saint Chariton's gone past
whether it goes careering past,
to feasts and fun this winter past;
he danced attendance with the best;
amusing, flattering with the best,
in other things you come off best:
the hat, the scowling brow, the chest
Oh, I've no strength... I'm tired, my chest...
sent at the Colonel's own behest.
cartoonist-pencils of Saint-Priest;11
startling the ingenuous with a jest,
young poet, be for ever blest!''
let's go together, take a rest...
her seal with its engraven crest.
pen, tears, and rhymes, and all the rest?
deceived, was overjoyed to rest.
the year, his age, then: ''may your rest,
I put your genius to the test,
down from the porch, light as the lightest,
when he arrived; not in the slightest:
A ball: the joy of every guest!
smile, voice and movements, little waist --
and evening now drew on in mist...
a secret truth, and at our cost
a life-creating voice was lost;
spared her the expense she dreaded most --
of her own horses, not the post,
even by Ladies' Fashion Post,
but never asked her husband first.
to pine away from passion's thirst,
if her cross mood was at its worst --
nor turned a poet. In the burst
to stem the bloodstream's wild outburst;
for raking up historic dust
it's hidden deep in gloom and dust.
as horses whirled him through the dust.
thank him by curtseying to the dust;
his parents' patriarchal dust
by will of Zeus, the high and just,
No matter; fate's decree is just.
and cheers salute him. Tanya must
or stirring annalistic must;
Alas! the generations must,
you'll read: here's Pradt,7 here's Walter Scott!
the Russian for le comme il faut.
onto the porch, and fussed about
among the neighbours round about.
We've many neighbours round about;
and strip the forest round about.
his dreams, while she whom they're about,
blinded to everything about
with lampions studded all about
glitters with hoar-frost all about.
into the social whirlabout;
Today it's turn and turn about.
with deep emotion looks about
of philosophic brains, about
something to rack his brains about,
who was it that you dreamt about?''
And how they weigh! I know about
she burst into a coughing-bout.
the days that doom has measured out.
covered her face. When all came out
suspecting wonders would come out.
on the highroad the wolves come out;
even to count them throws me out.''
at forty he'd have got the gout,
Her frightened cry brought running out
Tanya today goes hurrying out
do fields echo with work and shout;
''Make way, make way,'' goes up the shout;
she flails around, she tries to shout --
a sham that trustful souls work out;
humbly I heard your lesson out?
With that, in tears, and quite worn out,
Tatyana struggles to run out --
to the Larins' had caused a spout
her steppeland charms into a rout.3
have pushed their frontiers further out,
throw meadows into muddy rout,
the household boys in noisy rout;
blest the poor lover who reads out
the sumptuous palais shines out;
flits Olga: ''now, tell me straight out,
drunk, eaten, yawned, grown weak and stout,
Tatyana heard Evgeny out.
all these are charming! but to put
now disenchanted with the next,
more and more bored by yearning's text,
devouring Gibbon and Rousseau,
of Richardson and of Rousseau.
spoke words of hope? But who are you:
''Well, I won't hold you up or bore you;
But now - oh God! - the thought of you,
And now, my friends, I hear from you
really more bearable to you
Friendship, as I must own to you,
"When will the devil come for you?"
''But I'm denied this: all for you
or something tenderer still, for you.
''You're off? why, there's a poet for you!''
You husbands, deeply I respect you!
I'm at your service to protect you;
I would have chosen none but you
She faced him, questioning: ''But you?...''
secretly overheard by you.
V
Dmitriev
To Peter Alexandrovich Pletnev
Gvozd&iacute;n, Buy&aacute;nov, Petushk&oacute;v
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
LIV
LIV
XLIV
XLIV
XLIV
XLIV
XLIV
XLIV
IV
IV
XIV
XIV
XIV
XIV
XIV
XIV
XIV
XXIV
XXIV
XXIV
XXIV
XXIV
XXIV
XXIV
XXIV
XXXIV
XXXIV
XXXIV
XXXIV
XXXIV
XXXIV
XXXIV
XXXIV
LV
LV
XLV
XLV
XLV
XLV
XLV
XLV
Griboedov
proclaims where ponderous P&uacute;styakov
and counsellor (retired) Fly&aacute;nov,
and look, my cousin's come, Buy&aacute;nov,
V
V
V
V
V
V
(XIII, XIV,) XV
XV
XV
XV
XV
XV
XV
XXV
XXV
XXV
XXV
XXV
XXV
XXV
XXV
XXXV
XXXV
XXXV
XXXV
XXXV
XXXV
XXXV
XXXV
that, like proud Byron, I can draw
with the unmistakeable sideview
and, still transparent to the view,
ancestral1 portraits met the view
the pages of some dull review,
Guillot, behind a stump in view,
I'll say: with past ideals in view
the Corsair, or the Wandering Jew.
''It's nothing.'' And away he flew.
as by the shortest way they flew,
the jagged flint's pulled back anew.
a soul that nothing can renew...
of lovelorn girls was nothing new?
at some dull aunt's, sat down and knew
than most. Evgeny, though he knew
now I've forgotten all I knew.
Ah, all that my Onegin knew...
but she (for women, that's not new)
to us, though, not exactly new.
lest signs of casual weakness drew
how to engage in talk that drew
and flown like arrows from a bow.
and like an arrow from a bow
of pity: in his silent bow,
''How can one not love mother Moscow?''
must now employ my pen; somehow
and in his look there shows somehow
to hide a hope, to make a show
a parodistic raree-show?
already yawned before the show,
and finds the world a darkling show?
we'll talk, and talk, and then we'll show
to Tanya, all's an empty show.
that one be shot just anyhow --
to Olga's face, he whispered low
too long he's hoaxed us high and low...''
neighbour was sure, from this would flow
of ardent speech, that aching flow
he gazed out on the threatening glow.
and watch him stubbornly bring low
with each nuance of wintry glow:
must be my theme, if you'll allow.
and empty gossip, you'll allow,
a classicist, he'll not allow
with eyes of love, with greed to swallow
She's dropped her sash's silken billow;
until the dawn beneath her pillow.
and underneath her downy pillow
Proud Albion's lyre is what I follow,
and with the decorous throng to follow
to see you, faithfully to follow,
It's agony to watch the hollow
the man who laid her brother low.
and autumn lingered, long and slow;
the altar flame's extinguished now.
Why then do you pursue me now?
I gave my word, alas, though now
Onegin swiftly came to know
and in the morning wouldn't know
Shishkov,6 forgive me: I don't know
I only write like this, you know,
Reader, the elder sister now
a cheerful glimmer on the snow
only in January the snow,
and little dancing whirls of snow
and crisply crunch the morning snow.
forgot. Its trodden path is now
fir, forest, hedgehog, raven, snow
has painted for us the first snow
along the street lies dirty snow;
Maidservants on the beds just now
having decyphered on their brow
bear, blackness, blizzard, bridge and crow,
twin lamps of serried coup&eacute;s throw
her clever husband on the morrow
My soul's like crystal, and tomorrow
''As for the other one... tomorrow
thank you indeed. Alike in sorrow
The better to dispel her sorrow
Tanya to all her kin. My sorrow
I've run a mile, I must avow,
without a goal on which to fix,
IX
IX
IX
IX
IX
IX
LIX
XLIX
XLIX
XLIX
XLIX
Chapter Six
lived to the age of twenty-six;
XIX
XIX
XIX
XIX
XIX
XIX
XIX
XIX
XXIX
XXIX
XXIX
XXIX
XXIX
XXIX
XXIX
XXIX
(XXXVIII,2) XXXIX
XXXIX
XXXIX
XXXIX
XXXIX
(XXXVIII) XXXIX
LX
that wicked, loose-tongue chatterbox...
of that old duellistic fox,
long life to our dear friend, Bordeaux!
beyond a string of dull tableaux,
XX
(IX,2) X
X
X
(VIII,2 IX,) X
X
X
X
X
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
or on the granite of the bay.
I'd love you, but inside a day,
sickroom attendance night and day
Onegin, d'you recall the day
until the tombstone; there one day
and dreamt that she with him one day
What breasts! What soul!... We'll go one day
he looks, and sees the hour of day --
and then, indoors the livelong day,
in dark attire the new-born day.
seared as by fire, she stopped. Today
how are your kith and kin today?
Yet the mazurka keeps today
the same as any other day.
tomorrow just like yesterday.
he was a poet in his day.
I'd still like dances to this day:
Then, plunged in the housekeeper's day,
praised his fierce courage in its day:
was undiscovered to that day.
with old Anisia. The next day
then liking grew, then every day
to fresh grandparents every day.
the giddiest hope, carefree and gay,
two hearts, a torch, and a nosegay;
always monotonously gay,
or mother; and in all the play
who'd sit, and at the end of play
to see life as a ritual play,
before it was the golden play
watch the games we maidens play.''
struck for Evgeny, with its play
Tatyana's love is no by-play,
alarmed by my melodious lay,
when little notes come on a tray.
Eugene had no wish to betray
(in the romantic style, we say,
''It's nothing, nurse, nothing, I say...
at my famed portrait and will say:
I lack the strength required to say
Onegin had no word to say;
Lensky had a curt word to say
for your enlightenment to say
to reasoned talk, no dull hearsay,
like a sweet child. She'll never say:
visit the family, what d'you say?
forgotten features. ''Can you say,
in others' houses she may say
But you're not sociable, they say:
explodes; wine fizzes up... but stay:
who late at night are whirled away
past ice-blocks, blue and squared away,
with custom, love would fade away;
I've wasted too much life away!
Beneath storm's vestment, on the seaway,
would say goodbye and drive away,
sequence of dinners stretch away,
his hours to dreaming them away:
her grief, and nearly ran away.
darlings, then we'll run away,
pretty maidens, romp away,
looked on a river: far away
an ace a dozen yards away;
even if he drops or pines away.
so a storm-shadow wraps away
with care Zaretsky stows away
and never stir a foot away!
they leave their shores and fly away.
for witty; in his Gallic way
wanders in a distracted way
battling along that watery freeway,
a shambling hoof along the way;
and then sat silent all the way.
fail to perceive - that's by the way).
jointly would tread life's humble way!
invention sparkled, then gave way
to the empty homestead made her way,
''Farewell, you realms that own the sway
high time he should be on his way.
just send your grandson on his way.''
and held him briefly in their sway,
the grand barouche is on its way.
though we... don't shine in any way,
We each enjoy a special hobby,
each of us has his favourite lobby:
stiffening as the hours go by,
No word: another day goes by.
like mindless youth, the waltz goes by
dowagers smiled as she went by;
He smiled as Lensky talked: the heady
and he believed his friends were ready
are almost bursting; she's quite ready,
Why, pretty one, you're up already!
along Tverskaya Street already
but now, thank God, you're well and steady,
to put on chains for him, and steady
prevailed, and with composure steady
the potholes make the coach unsteady.
his mind, in judgement still unsteady,
ask Tanya out to dine, and they
of children, though as young as they,
they met on horseback; quickly they
Amidst the hills, down in that valley,
he goes ahead and parts the motley
''My dear good sir, I'm short of money.''
and how a country lives, and why
herself not knowing how or why)
''Why did you visit us, but why?
the cold perfection of the sky,
to boom, to flash across the sky,
Prince Vyazemsky
Baratynsky
Zhukovsky
and there, beneath your noonday sky,
the blaze of candles, and the trembly
They take her too to the Assembly.
and in my soul, o spring, how madly
O spring! o time for love! how sadly
girls as they passed her spoke less loudly,
and no one in the room so proudly
that languid beauty, listens nicely --
Days when I came to flower serenely
the expanse of fields, so wide, so lonely,
Today... the sad memorial's lonely,
is the supreme reward. Precisely,
pronouncing through her nose politely
''My goodness, how the years do fly!''
to captivate, and then to fly.
or, sweeter, like a butterfly
thickly the exclamations fly.
as pair by pair the dancers fly.
across green meadows, dilly-dally,
and read my Apuleius keenly,
It all seemed new - for two days only --
grey-haired and weak, beneath it only
Onegin's life, you see, was holy;
Onegin still is slumbering deeply.
By now the sun is climbing steeply,
demanding: when will he reply?
who swaggers in with the reply.
will give you a complete reply.
do with her when a flat reply
So Lensky wrote, obscurely, limply
though what's romantic here I simply
to sing of others must imply
it needs no gold if a supply
But not today. Although I dearly
though I'll come back to him, yet clearly
''Last night, what made you fly so early?''
of finishing its book, but early
Blest he who's left the hurly-burly
All Lensky's thoughts went hurly-burly,
with a quick look perusing lightly
will halt her horse and, gripping tightly
lacing her stays up very tightly;
The fire was dying; cinders faintly
tumbled and whirled and twisted quaintly
and bliss for him is when he hotly
She's fallen in the snow - alertly
and she, submissively, inertly --
to dreaming given up unduly,
and, as the years went by, who duly
So she was called Tatyana. Truly
is represented rather truly,
Blest he who in his youth was truly
the rosy bloom that glowed so newly
bright summer days that passed so slowly,
Onegin was assessed by many
(critical judges, strict as any)
''You don't see what to do? that's funny:
is deep in love, just like a boy;
reluctant to exhaust the boy,
''he dandled me as a small boy.
lately he married off his boy.''
on Christmas Eve, he wished me joy:
treated his lessons as a ploy.
brooding that is the lover's ploy.
How many times I made a toy
never come and like a spy
spends light and darkness in the dreary
on features known, but to that dreary,
across to her consort a weary
bored with hilarity, and weary,
Your horse, blunt-shoed and all unwary,
The two old ladies kiss and cry;
in unison repeat the cry:
but Tanya found she couldn't cry:
all egoistical and dry,
in flowers of spring it's drinking dry:
in order daily, chez V&eacute;ry,1
Alas, Eugene beyond all query
How long he'd been here, was her query,
have your fill of revelry!
before him roast beef, red and gory,
fortune, and dignity, and glory,
''as sung of old, in years of glory,
and leave no faint footprint of glory...
there Didelot10 crowned himself with glory:
''To me, Onegin, all this glory
I meant to paint, with Alban's8 glory,
and p&acirc;t&eacute;, Strasbourg's deathless glory,
once more Corneille's majestic story;
at fifty, would prolong the story
this modish whirl, this social story,
to high renown my doleful story,
Only the ode, that solemn story!
Right at the outset of my story
But onward, onward with my story!
That isn't our immediate worry:
Now she's alarmed; in desperate worry
with perturbation and with worry;
He rings at once, and what a scurry!
she can't; and in her panic hurry
and while the star still flew, she'd hurry
with gown and slippers; tearing hurry,
where, in a cab, and furious hurry,
boredom has just as sure an entry,
Yes, spleen was waiting like a sentry,
addressed to Onegin''... ...'Well, that's easy.
Why have you gone all pale and queasy?''
for in our time, beyond dubiety,
Capricious belles of grand Society!
But, did they not corrupt society,
Alas, on pleasure's wild variety
another's grin was sly and shifty,
But, in a fearful huff, his thrifty
But then, oblivious of the city,
drive there, and with formality
of old-lime hospitality.
in far Moldavia, fit for pity,
the guests are feasted, good and hearty,
go off to sleep quite hale and hearty,
where shall he go, my rogue, my hearty?
is this - one sees from here the party:
devote to whist an evening party,
a ball here, there a children's party;
You'd never class her as a beauty;
Take Olga's shoulders now - the beauty!
and look serenely on your beauty!...
I've known too many a haughty beauty,
what London calls, with humble duty
inexorably wed to duty,
All flourishing; they send their duty.
meanwhile with a dissembler's duty
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------










---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
the secrets of the grave, the pages
of Neva's proud imperial water,
that wit embarrasses the dull;
and put our heart into a shiver
XIV
to stem the bloodstream's wild outburst;
is where old master took up station,
from early morning on he will
There's din of parting now that rages,
And with a smile the world caressed us:
as when chill autumn rains surround us,
Princess Alina. She was still
Whose fond attentions will astound us?
and now it's Bordeaux the Judicious
and heart so tender, it can still
everything's dim and unenthusing;
Enough. The load is off my shoulder!
of wild repentance and devotion
Their talk, so sound on every matter,
is yawned away with friends and wife
a great attraction to conversing.
a wondrous tenderness. And whether
And what's more, they're so supercilious,
without an elegiac frill,
it will be our descendants who
she finds in river and in hill.
a tomb, a Cyprian shrine's invented,
and then old cousin Pelag&eacute;ya
cows low, in the still nights of spring
or else does nature, fresh and staring,
for grumbling, gossiping and swearing
Petushk&oacute;v, local Paris, tearing,
XXIV
Since earliest boyhood he had doted
the clink of rowels, met his hearing;
a general of majestic bearing
evoke emotion's pitter-patter,
was the sad poet not confounded
as fate's mysterious purpose burrows,
and sideways her poor head is stooping.
to nobody except a wizened
of Moscow in the mournful days
Poor Lensky! where the tomb is bounded
lost them without regret's contusion,
on my untimely urn be weeping,
and part in kindness? Just the same,
the level tenor of his going,
''Tell me, what's your companion doing?''
when galloping at headlong pace
from the agent, with this tale to tell:
this angel, this proud devil, tell,
yes, these were our forefathers' ways,
the hero's name's decided too.
down from the porch, light as the lightest,
This work of the profoundest learning
in far Moldavia, fit for pity,
which smilingly your friend, supported
across green meadows, dilly-dally,
she went inside the empty shell
And now there's gradually beginning
And long, as if through mists that spurted,
Eugene turned countryman. He tasted
gave up the ancient Kremlin-keys:
seared as by fire, she stopped. Today
and flown like arrows from a bow.
that strikes him with such force and meaning?
I see another problem looming:
solemn, too long compelled to throttle
of Tanya's image... Ah, how great
''How slow you are at guessing, nyanya!''
her handkerchief has fallen too;
no, forests are the sole retreat
These figures from the world of seeming,
With mounts from home, or postal station,
and other, more exacting worries,
the climacteric of our life,
before a fire too slowly flaming,
the universe is all perfection;
knowing the offender, he'd been frightened
perhaps for fame, he was endowed;
how sensuously her eyes are dreaming!
sickroom attendance night and day
a truly noble disposition;
by sluggish Lethe may be swallowed,
I'd love you, but inside a day,
in which, dear friends, we're all afloat!
that he's not honest past all question.''
stirred at your gaze, so strange, so gleaming,
the keys that opened up the hall.
the art he'd studied best of all,
A thinker in a desert mission,
each took four steps across the space,
hate, love, joy, sorrow - every feeling,
allows her hand, that's lost all feeling,
or just grammatical mistakes,
on dance-floor, at breakup of ball,
XLV
with your good offices, and so
spurs of Chevalier Gardes are clinking,
and read my Apuleius keenly,
maiden in this superb, unthinking
sed alia tempora! The devil
nor his,2 who sings of Finland's maid.
and your alas-ing and alack-ing
and growing thicker; then, heart-shaking,
I signal to each passing sail.
no softball for the winds of fashion,
after your drive, it's quite back-breaking;
I ask you, each and every poet!
freezes my blood... Yet all the same,
they fluff her curls out in the fashion,
was stripped away, and mists encroaching
and slowly day begins to climb.
its echoes, its belated urging,
two verses of the Aeneid.
XX
she loved the steppe-land and its singing,
demanded. ''Yes, she looks... And yet...
as linen's brought for him to wear.
that night, in secret, set for two;
show me the sense. Divine decree
No answer comes. Another letter
a quilted chamber-robe and cap.
in goods and fame!'' But the sad-sounding
of every funeral far and wide;
listless, impatient, for the pounding
No, I was born for peace abounding
in flannel, and an old fur cap.
before their eyes they see unfold
Lensky resolved before the duel
had killed his best friend in a duel;
and entice a fellow in
and volume three of Marmontel.
some regimental bard has added
desires and dreams and griefs were breeding
has opened up his serving-trap.
ditties of our secret world,
for dreams, or journalistic battle,
now Lovelace's renown has faded
while floors would split from crash of heel,
raised nose and shoulders high and wide
a suite of elegies that, throbbing,
odd volumes from the devil's shelf,
your Zeus, your Cypris, your whole band
''But, if you've kept some faint impression
How often, with her sweet communion,
wakened at the same hour of night
to the princess, in his weak hand,
the happenings of the previous night;
to gentlemen on every side
have clearly got the upper hand
still everywhere the lamps are bright;
Time was, he'd been the wittiest ever,
with Eugene proved a tempting prize.
with eyes aflame Onegin rises
apartment where a double glaze
the fleeting tenderness that stole
ran through the fields, sheer panic fright
in unison repeat the cry:
There many pages keep the impression
we were swept off, in reverie's haze,
blinded to everything about
with charming forefinger she traced
but then a sudden breeze surprises,
''OE'' devotedly inlaced.
Evgeny thought in just this fashion.
But that's enough. My beauty's letter
blest... though perhaps her fancy's caught
bestirred himself, was devilish active!
from ball to bed behold him come;
she was unhurried, unobtrusive,
one leads the multitude in thought,
in this fifth chapter of my work.
Alas, on pleasure's wild variety
Then, crying, they untwined my plait,
over the waters in a sweep;
this very day I'd gladly give,
perhaps her love could in the end
she never even bit her lip.
billiards are dropped, cue put to bed:
now I've forgotten all I knew.
could I accept for just a minute
and in her unconsidered note
than most. Evgeny, though he knew
XXIX
but it's the first time you'll have known it,
a grey-haired, perfumed exquisite,
of recompense beyond endurance,
XXIX
of pity for my wretched state,
would bless the form his fortune took.
Tatyana's letter, treasured ever
have reunited friend to friend!
you're really going? Well, I'm sad.
&lt; ...
good night; I swear I'll lie down soon.''
With a sharp epigram it's pleasant
Applause. Onegin enters - passes
''Olga,'' she thinks, ''what fate befell her?
I don't know why, but for my friend
Listen to me without resentment:
of ranks and ages so diverse.
befitting such a noble pile:
the man of honour and of sense.
smiles, and a maiden's tranquil poise,
by sighs of passion or by praise.
(I like a friendly conversation,
such good and sensible advice;
though years ago I used to look
sits with Limburg's vivacious cheese
emboldened by his Olga's smile,
the horrid nightmare must portend
that raves with poetry can ever
someone like you and me, just nice?
where you were born as well, I think,
girls' albums, signed in blood for choice;
custom is despot of mankind.
dip in their jugs; where shadows quiver
your feet, to pale and waste... what rapture!
''Qu'&eacute;crirez-vous sur ces tablettes?''
he changed the corv&eacute;e of tradition
and, as observer, to be present
the flaming roses of a cheek,
he's put belle Tatiana instead.
dda
but pantaloons, waistcoat, and frock,
surer than friendship or than kin,
my disillusioned glass, and yearn,
your Tanya's image in your mind,
caricatured them in his mind.
our friend Kat&eacute;nin8 brought to bear
Malfil&acirc;tre
of tales of girls, and ghosts, and lore:
Eugene's response was automatic;
the highest circles are a bore.
his freedom, in his youth's first flower,
and it deceived us in return;
a joker in the old tradition,
she stopped at the loud torrent's bound,
to wreak, by stirring Lensky's ire,
has found an end before his time.
is either the distrait Vampire,
to lie down at her feet like slaves!
IX
a crayfish rides on spider-back;
to dreaming given up unduly,
And if she happened anywhere
in his defence, and smash it up;
the world and all its works, she wept
to pass for an affected freak,
the bear explains: ''my cousin's here --
In heart's affairs, a sweet beginner,
I keep them, and will quote them here:
closely embraced, in wending here,
Tanya to all her kin. My sorrow
verdicts of vanity the bleak,
and Grandison beyond compare,
for friends of languor, or of fun,
can disavow that. I have read
your grief would fail to touch my heart,
his song was limpid in its tune
How soft his glance, or at discretion
I'll conjure up that swooning fashion
who never learnt how dreamers babble;
to come back to the hall alone
and granite, were so far apart.
He gave this figure - loved with passion,
''I am in love; leave me alone.''
XXXVI
As with old friends, she craves diversion
dumb I must perish, and alone.
Eugene takes Olga, and is gone;
you took an honourable part --
her soul was waiting... for someone.
dreamt of reproving what they'd done:
boulevards, chemists, and Cossacks,
I gave no rein to sweet affection:
no notice of them. But I've chattered
VI
a faster, stronger pulsing start.
the heart of the professional flirt!
and yet by Vergil or Racine
old mother winter at her pranks.
all point at her, and all combine
to encase herself inside a layer
the festal name day has begun.
Reader, the elder sister now
Zaretsky bit his lip. Eugene
one finds in war amusing sport,
XLVI
of powers unripe, or on the wane,
Right at the outset of my story
with Eugene frozen where he stood.
The aunts exchanged a look, they fluttered,
dreams of inconsequential cast,
XLVI
he fell in love with darkest wildwood,
the guardian angel of tradition,
a single thing to her. His head
she walked across a snowy plain
But come, thou youthful inspiration,
the modish Record Office clerks
about them - nineteen to the dozen --
put back the libel on the table
But where, mid tragic storms that rend her,
And foes he sees, long-since forgotten,
The illness with which he'd been smitten
but now, thank God, you're well and steady,
and at the very self-same time
or half-unwittingly preferred
XXII
hear, once more filled with inspiration,
it's yes or no, but never sir.''
the ring of marriageable girls --
in one so slothful, so hard-bitten?
he carries her inside the door
''Well, I won't hold you up or bore you;
Gvozd&iacute;n, exemplary farmer,
onset of the incipient yawn,
of blind Fortuna and of men
of far-away Onegin's name.
XXXIII
goes out of us when youth is dead.
a note from Lensky; in between
XIII
XIII
XXXVIII
XXVIII
to me her best in-quarto tome,
She faced him, questioning: ''But you?...''
XVIII
where shall he go, my rogue, my hearty?
''How long can you... ?'' ''Dearest kuzina!''
project in silhouette the tops
VIII
Books, riding, walks, sleep heavy-laden,
No word: another day goes by.
Riding on the lugubrious prairie?
so effortlessly can disarm.
the friends' salute she never hears
arch-rake, pothouse tribune-persona,
I'm grieving still, but no more tears,
the odious bear still grunts and lumbers.
maybe bore off with it for ever
Longtime inside this modish cloister,
and, with my Eugene, so have I.
to which so oft we've dedicated
I'd not have known you, therefore I
my noon is here, and that's the truth.
having by her severe demeanour
parodies winter in the south;
they've moved around and been reseated;
He's always with her: either seated
''r&eacute;veillez-vous, belle endormie.''
her Russian was as thin as vapour,
to liven with a silk atour
I'll gladden your imagination,
Now Latin's gone quite out of favour;
of the dull shores of my disfavour,
thou, my Svetlana!
That year the season was belated
At home she'll equably receive him,
Tatyana never knew the attraction
over it a mysterious wreath:
Just before dinner, from his labours
V
ours was no Grandison - not he.
on waves of far niente floated,
which I myself won't praise or blame
in sheepskin coat with scarlet sash.
life's real meaning would have found him;
did any glasses seek her face,
that there be just one voice which came,
gazes at him... and nonetheless,
pride's icy calm, the combination
and sighs, and asks oneself all through:
''I know it all: my secret ache
The poet's dead... already though
and offer to that ash a sigh;
there was a general furtive chatter,
custom's bestowed us from on high.
IV
oppressed her like a heavy dream.
his strangeness, wholly unaffected,
I suffered once from all the madness
He sang of love, to love subjected,
set the guests smiling at his arch,
in time (to quote the calculation
adore the love that comes in dream.
and melancholy as Svetlana,2
The days flew past; by now the season
across our snows of northern bleakness
Oh God, what did he think!'' A dream
XL
shows freedom's advocate, that strong
the pain, the grief, the marrow-freezing
he's called you out - say, in your soul
give for a bookshelf, a neglected
But he's mistaken: Eugene's lying
a poet, and a Kantian sage.
wild as a forest deer, and fearful,
the ladies' calculated dress;
a Muscovite in Harold's dress,
Omens dismayed her with their presage;
than what our sorrowing rhymesters do?
tracked him, and put him in duress,
They laugh. The guests begin arriving.
How could she? why, he'd never heard...
has made the park her brooding-place,
they're plunging, whirling, all but squatting.
and though perhaps old fires were thrusting
of philosophic isolation,
she spins and, friend of winter nights,
Zaretsky, engineer-in-waiting,
Eugene was free, and as a dresser
for nature's unadorned reaction
for your enlightenment to say
there never fails a kindly greeting,
of language which, so long ago,
The fields are dark, since evening came.
in indescribable elation,
There came a murmur, for a fleeting
Buy&aacute;nov's heels have split the wood
of your slim prints! though this be treason
another's joy, another's breast,
now as before, inside my breast;
pointed each year, for time to come,
the horror of disgrace and crime,
Fonvizin8 sparkled, freedom's champion,
young poet, be for ever blest!''
and not a mention of my name...''
Why have you gone all pale and queasy?''
to see you, faithfully to follow,
of her own horses, not the post,
and with the decorous throng to follow
he sends, a second, then a third.
''You're married? No idea whatever...
on Eugene's lips. In his dejection,
with perturbation and with worry;
there's yap of pugs, and laughs, and bustle;
too pale, too thin, but on the whole
of sunlight makes it flash and crumble,
She sits with Nina8 at a table --
piled books, and through the pane the sable
for Satan, love's a splendid joke.
Five versts or so from Krasnog&oacute;rie,
the men confront them, face to face:
took her to his estate, where she,
was younger still, but at that stage
XIV
from young Tatyana's dwelling-place,
XIV
XXXIV
up the hillside at breakneck pace;
sigh, and stood up, began to pace;
and I'll be true to him, for life.''
now sensitive, and now carefree,
and then, with an enchanting grace,
V
(XIII, XIV,) XV
the spring of honour, and the pin
XV
XXV
An unknown yard, she sees from thence,
to life and hope with just a glance --
but I won't praise you - let me join
as by the shortest way they flew,
that this of all things for a swain
not separation's chilling power,
in that new couch, no sleep for certain;
To whom do you, from all the train
flown like an arrow, then he's given
and paler than the moon at dawn,
and with a yawn took up his pen,
but now the mansion is forsaken;
lightly attired, like the creator
Don Juan's and the Giaour's creator,
and once forbidden fruit is seen,
You've guessed before it all began:
he sleeps, away from glare and glamour,
you newborn work, and like a winner
his beefsteak with champagne, or drown
and read the books there on her own.
With spelling scrambled to perdition,
And our young poet - Olga fired him
the tighter we can stretch above them
Or he knew how to reconcile them
into the cups its darkling stream --
of Russian verse, its force in action, --
Happy is he who's known its fretful
and ananas, the gold of trees.
Her passion burns with stronger powder
''It is a friend I sing, a youthful
the child prepares for protocol --
Of those who heard my opening pages
he drinks - all shout and take a swill;
''I think I'm happy.'' Time to go,
and bedbug that infest the stages
and almost swoons, and almost dies.
he trembles, knows not what to tell;
or pine, persuade of yes or no,
All are dumbfounded. Lensky shies
is there to lisp its pack of lies.
was it not you, dear apparition,
tumbled and whirled and twisted quaintly
you object of my guileless ditties!
Wildly the fearful laughter pealed;
wishes his madness to the devil,
to face him now I feel too frail...
send them good wishes through the mail
shows up through trees, all of a grovel
Now, faced with this enormous revel,
you've made so many secret rhymes,
the floor serves Triquet for his nap,
her way; she passed, then as she walked
sweet words by which her pain was banned --
The crush, the heat, as music blares,
so heartless and so detrimental,
Melmoth,7 whose roaming never ceases,
an urge to sleep; soon, clear as clear,
''The Lord God be with you, my daughter!''
he dozed away; but when the real
But, as it is, this pied collection
and then a stroll in Letny Park.
Here, in his red peruke and glasses,
blest is the advent of the dark!
then Lensky moved his pawn, and took,
by ancient limes, or by a brook;
profoundly sunk, Tatyana stalked
Eugene, at Olga's side, was racked
Some days he's still in bed, and drowses,
but meanwhile let him live, and think
were served in order of their rank.
the branches of the oak with flock;
but when past joking he fell sick,
Though belles had lost his adoration,
he arrives - the cork goes flying up,
and hid the bookshelf's dusty stack
of his Och&aacute;kov7 decoration!
like a majestic moon, she drives
stripping my soul before your eyes!
friends, recollect how I surrendered
XXI
So she was called Tatyana. Truly
XLVI
and how a country lives, and why
XLI
brings out its faro pack, and deals.
ghostlike, must trouble him who feels --
whom thirty centuries have adored!
the potholes make the coach unsteady.
to her flower-garden, to her novels, --
brushes for teeth, brushes for nails.
XXXVII
XLVII
XLVII
VII
to talk to her, but language died.
And of the cupboards, one contains
the Muses' lofty arts and fashions,
Softly the door is opened, enter
XXIII
''Why not?'' ''I'd choose the other quarter
old prejudice; all men are zeros,
that lives, and glitters, and endears,
III
threats, vows, and simulated fears,
He thought that Olga'd be confused,
a friend of yours in his first youth
the grand barouche is on its way.
but here we must control our mouth.
retired, forgotten by his brothers,
devoured a book with rapt attention,
so fires of spring will bring to birth
Oh, when, and to what desert banished,
and raven curls of shoulder-length.
a fashion-plate for illustrators,
and whisper ''Dunya, pay attention!''
Tatyana watched the moon, and floated
accounts, shaved forelocks,4 Sunday bath;
he'll charm you with his fine invention,
Onegin was assessed by many
adorns Aunt Helen, the princess;
can it be true, and firmly stated
a portrait with a charming touch;
a dog with horns, a goatee'd witch,
that youthful soul, which pined for sadness;
his dull, sick look, his dumb reproach --
the noise their rustic wheels projected --
the young hostess, towards whom each
such rustic cunning can't be wrong!) --
that could sustain it? Only grimness;
by mist of tears, without replying
bespectacled, in tattered dress;
propped in the door among the press.
giving the lady their protection,
our terror is their consolation.
But you're not sociable, they say:
Ladies came over, crossed to meet her,
The yard was bursting with dependants;
But in that desert his attainments
its glaring feasts, and shrill events,
what store of riches it imparts!
in due succession; hers is lifted
the fleeting works of my creation,
While Lensky'd long been meditating
reluctant to exhaust the boy,
find, in the trivial, serious matter;
you sought - tumultuous recollection,
And suddenly her radiance lighted
he wakes; a bath where ice is floating;
now, by green tablecloths awaited,
lately he married off his boy.''
ladies of riper years, delicious
Winter!... The countryman, enchanted,
''I dread your stern regard surmising
that's the refrain that you should sing,
and act the humble or imperious,
no glance so sweet, no sigh so teasing,
convinced at heart that my most zealous
her sacred store of bliss and weeping
High ceilings everywhere abounded;
If only Lensky'd known the burning
with his forefathers would seem better;
earth's rim grows light, and a forewarning
I shall set out on brand-new ways
Zaretsky watched, and stood there grinning.
I write, my heart has ceased its pining,
the frozen corpse, drives off, and homing
Meanwhile the news of Eugene coming
started a life of pointless roaming,
he looks, and sees the hour of day --
As soon as he appears, discussion
What breasts! What soul!... We'll go one day
the gift of recognizing what
lickspittles who adore their crawling,
Should your perfections be expended
''I can't sleep, nyanya: it's so stifling!
XXX
I know your heart: it has a feeling
he's lost his self-command, and crazed
that, artless, and without concealing,
by nervous hands of a schoolmaid:
XXX
only the pallor of heart-breaking
with every sort of home possession:
For such am I. When you were speaking
on springtime grasses of the field,
I walk the shore,17 I watch the weather,
and watch your daughters closer yet,
my word; no welshing, as I live. &gt;
ripen, and find a new expression --
X
What of it? Nothing. I'm just sending
Whatever for caprice of spending
... &gt;2
and in it boldly I'm confiding''...
behind her followed wildly dancing;
Now he's returned, what role's he dancing?
spying my features, as he could,
each news of her he'd been imbibing --
XXXIX
where nowadays I'm soundly trounced,
that Menelaus was quite right --
and taken by the French - some prize! --
had been imposed by winter's hand;
of tears will cloud her tender gaze.
the spring invites you to the land
Where are you? come - and my own right
now a protruding branch assails her
and home he drives, deep-sunk in thought.
in flowers of spring it's drinking dry:
the sky is brilliant in its blue
slave of the service, was en route.
XXIX
and, when one's least prepared for it
he'd see his soul cool in its grate;
compact of amorous trash, and worse,
''Boredom, that's what so bad, my friend.''
the all&eacute;e to the lake, the copse;
for in our time, beyond dubiety,
that virgin dream and its confession
(for which he must receive due praise).
whither does all my yearning tend?
Tanya thanks each one with a phrase.
and only wish that my employment
His wife, just like Tatyana, had
on stage are thumping without cease;
But that's enough. At once, in stead,
more thoroughly, thank God, the creature
that, meanwhile, pinched and glum of feature,
and satisfied with what he'd got,
tries out the ice with cautious tread,
that poison brew; and in your mind
But now, in this vindictive pleasure
of Olga: love's that kind of bore!
bbc
to hear what latest modes require,
they don't deserve what they inspire
IX
doubts, to exhaust the heart, then fire
two pines have tangled at the root;
which with a blush he leaves unread.
then suddenly she's off, and there
and pledged to you, and firmly planned:
Russia's Terpsichore, shall never
and ease his catch with all due care.
in a melodious, flute-like tone.
of hope sometimes disturbs my heart;
around her neck, or when for her
thirty-two steps with great precision,
and listen for the heart's first sound,
this modish whirl, this social story,
left her to follow her own line,
to puzzle out with some precision
to a soir&eacute;e. ''My God! to her!...
Then Tanya hears of the decision.
that king of the satiric scene,
earn us the favour of the Court?
as well-read, though of pedant cast.
and trails alone around the wood.''
study where he would sleep and feast
is graven on that face of stone.
untouched by trace of inhibition,
Foes! Is it long since from each other
a modish second-hand edition,
''What nonsense, Tanya! in those other
''Bliss was so near, so altogether
Vladimir to this casual mention
it's late, time's passing... not to mention,
What cause has won me your attention?
in our affair, the intervention
He gave three balls a year, and rather
by Scott, by Seneca, or Byron,
alone with him; Onegin takes her
he drives up in and out of season
no meaning in or out of season,
The city's early sounds awake her;
a ball in Petersburg; but fun
perhaps - for flattering hope will linger --
roamed the still forest like a ranger,
would talk, keep silent, laugh, then frown --
Onegin without more ado
as instituted long ago.''
and roused the village long ago:
where did that glum eccentric go,
and where most surely notes are sped.
your loved one, honourable reader!
Grandison, cousin, d'you remember?''
so pious, and so clever too,
but spared no glance for Cicero;
mountains will part; below the deep,
Only Tatyana does not sleep,
henceforth in front of you I weep,
by judgement of the modern camp
the wine-addict adores the cup:
my student cell: she opened up
with parks and mansions, open up.
I don't mean that she never shivered,
''My dear good sir, I'm short of money.''
in quiet flood. A beetle whirred.
album and stays, Princess Alina,
is this - one sees from here the party:
the time to go has long since passed
a haze in me, but I grew used
they buried Uncle, congregated
its nullity I've always hated,
while, marmot-like, he hibernated --
his tale of youthful love, narrated
jointly would tread life's humble way!
a bit provincial and affected,
assembly, silent and dejected?
However closely he inspected,
who late at night are whirled away
singing in chorus as directed
like a sweet child. She'll never say:
Diana's breast, the cheeks of Flora,
No path to see: the snow has drifted
inexorably wed to duty,
go off to sleep quite hale and hearty,
Where is the fire that once ignited,
where two old pinetrees stand united:
two hearts, a torch, and a nosegay;
was undiscovered to that day.
Outside the gate Tatyana parted
Eugene would willingly have started
how are your kith and kin today?
sweet old tradition was preserved:
paterfamilias (unwed),
ccb
XXX
the lucky bard, and as he dozed
So my Zaretsky, as I said,
under the table's linen shield,
beyond the grave we all must build --
X
a flood on which no frosty band
presses its forebears to the tomb.
to save the honour of our land
with me to see an alien strand;
Bordeaux, you're like a faithful friend,
you kept your friendship with our friend:
diversely urging the same plea,
Onegin wastes, you'd almost find
it stirs her drooping soul to bound
spread out its shadow all around --
let fall his pistol on the ground.
the programme of his daily round.
twin lamps of serried coup&eacute;s throw
or for a lamentable manic,
She hates a friendly voice's sound,
forgot. Its trodden path is now
and little dancing whirls of snow
only in January the snow,
How oft she'd lead me, by the Tauric
which Ovid sang, for which the bard,
and always the inspired regard --
Olga's no life in her regard:
he's racing millward like a bird.
she sat there; through her teeth a word
acute and subtle - in a word
and empty gossip, you'll allow,
to Eugene's letter, word for word.
and washed its face, to her brought word
he gazed out on the threatening glow.
Through the tight ranks - aristocratic,
must now employ my pen; somehow
in through the door, at swallow's pace,
that world where every man's a critic
though some support it with good grace).
of instant thoughts, a fleeting trace
there waited for us both the malice
to Moscow settled in a trice.
and I'll be thirty in a trice?
to the circle of our dance.
more joy still when with mute insistence
XXXV
no deathless truths, nothing scholastic;
the coolness of the sombre glade,
XV
since then my heart was wrenched aside;
he's moved... you see him from the side.''
XV
she can't; and in her panic hurry
on points that all long since agree --
the sad beginnings of his life
XXIV
the lies that in the press run rife,
good-looking, in the flower of age,
and yet your honour is my gage
LIV
bright Northern Cleopatra she:
and obstinate his look. But she
I roam by the secluded lake.
I would have chosen none but you
and shouts suggest a crowded wake;
''Tanya's no child - it's past a joke,''
such crystalled scents as best are able
bewitches Tanya... he is able
more and more bored by yearning's text,
Tatyana heard Evgeny out.
with every different kind of rabble...''
throw meadows into muddy rout,
Tatyana struggles to run out --
from her they strive to coax and coddle
do fields echo with work and shout;
she burst into a coughing-bout.
And how they weigh! I know about
was far from happy with his role.
and cheers salute him. Tanya must
No matter; fate's decree is just.
dons of Epicurean rule,
for raking up historic dust
Petrovsky Castle; and the fame
to do them all is easy game.
a secret truth, and at our cost
though Menelaus, in Helen's name,
with storm and tumult in his head,
what have your wits to do with me?
sent at the Colonel's own behest.
of something vague, some misty clime;
that stretched from Romulus in his prime
amusing, flattering with the best,
In winter, when for longer time
the ardent author of the past
drawn from a dim, warm-hearted past,
torment of pride? And why's he come?
and, with it, forced renown to come --
the hostess cries and, moving fast,
I need to rest from all this rhyme:
and faithful wife I'd have been cast.
reader, by painting you a scene
won't benefit these guts of mine.''
for Tanya, winter's ways are dread.
for him, the objective on life's chart
''And here's the hearth,'' explains the crone,
are coloured in a single tone,
consequences of hideous woe;
by my Eugene, not for his heart,
my wretched Lensky in his heart
youth is a fever; we must spare
At first, disparity of heart
Now all was still. Tatyana slept.
shall not attack my lily's root;
Onegin looks with eyes of fire:
we have to cherish and admire
Tatyana in low-cut attire
they'd settled that some years before.
attainable!... But now my lot
its grip on him, forgot to count
the secret of her husband's measure,
it touched with reverie her leisure,
and yet inseparably present,
to blow his brains out, but in stead
for she was bored by laughs and noise
for tempests and for feasts and noise;
my declaration may give rise!
here there's no conscience, here no sense;
his housekeeper and her department
he leaves the house, calls for his horse
even in our names (and how much worse
condemns the monde and its excitement;
but, nurse, you see... Oh, don't refuse...''
for you have, at this early date,
in your pursuit I've come to know it:
by calmly aiming at his pate
I've known too many a haughty beauty,
or languid bosoms; and no visit
that I'm just longing to indite --
Alas, our youth was what we made it,
that all of Russia can't contribute
Godfearing folk will institute
on billiard-table rests a cue,
to cool my glances and my tongue,
on a small bench by Tanya's bed,
ourselves on our landfall. It's true,
and your sincerity of thought
revive it with another shove --
ages we'd never heard of love:
and beat a nacreous wing when caught
has wished it an abrupt goodbye --
not only by Evgeny's eye;
has fixed on her a steady gaze.
and all into the salon squeeze,
a simple Russian family night:
in a peaked cap, all dust and fluff, --
he charged three roubles and a half,
he never took one from the shelf,
converting morning to midnight,
How heavy, and how near to sobbing,
with visions of enchanted night,
he drives there like a bird in flight,
He mounts the sledge, with daylight fading:
a stanza villainously padded.
he stoops and, tenderly confiding,
bottles to which some pitch is clinging:
Then verdicts from her husband's quartet
Then our Automedons are flashing,
youth which has nothing to regret,
not to see Olga; in a fret
in frosted bottle, for the poet
Friends of my Ruslan and Lyudmila,
across the stage; he yawns: ''Ballet --
Vladimir, wealthy and good-looking,
fancies once more are hotly bubbling,
through him is sweetness' self. In grumbling
in the salon new faces meet,
as from their luscious hive go tumbling
just sentries to each other calling,
when night patrol's a perilous calling;
We all meandered through our schooling
no, not for long were belles the ruling
one customary object gleaming,
respect, and mercy for my dreaming.
Shot through below the chest - and streaming
never come and like a spy
and duck get up; with instant timing,
And all grandmothers who are listening
amongst the crafty and small-minded,
a mansion stands just round a turning.
of one sole thought holds him in keeping
''You're ill, God have you in his keeping,
into a modish tyrant's keeping
that once I spent my happiest days?
Poor Lensky! Set aside for weeping,
up your accounts, and raging, toping,
into the pan. Securely gripping,
even in novels, vice entraps us,
All sleep: from the saloon a roaring
to draw a breath, around her staring
her worth (but anathematising
of any Br&eacute;guet: and in passing
and though my muse may be capricious,
Is it that we've become officious
''he dandled me as a small boy.
light as a shadow, shuns a meeting,
she visited the humble tents
in sighs and boredom and deceits
Her eyes along the margin flitting
the draught whose blessings are agreed,
the earlier griefs are what I miss.
''Tell me, our neighbours, are they thriving?
towards the Larins' and arriving
and when its waters were not showing,
roses romantically blowing;
Day faded; on the table, glowing,
but Eugene's out from din and press:
Eugene's a pedant in his dress,
or kiss the border of her dress.
And yet, although it's past conveying,
your heart some self-restraint; for each
so sketchily possessed by each,
his humbly suppliant approach,
Full of obedience and demureness,
I've seen how, trustful in his blindness,
you age, and life's just grief and sadness...''
along the Neva in a sleigh,
were picking berries from the bough,
in fact a thorough fop, no less.
is finished, and I've looked it through
the imperturbable princess.
heartfelt, imploring, touching trash
just there, is talking to the Spanish
no proud pretentions to success,
there's nothing can employ her anguish,
My goddesses! Where are you banished?
a seedling fallen in the earth.
nanny, companion of my youth;
to happen long ago, dear readers,
VIII
XLVIII
of ladies and of freakish fops.
and whiskers - all of this it keeps
XXXVIII
a Russian family's old traditions;
XLII
XLVII
the snow from all surrounding hills;
in boxes or the rows of stalls.
XXII
XXII
some disagreeable remarks.
VI
XVI
XXVI
XXXVI
XI
noise in her ears, glare in her eyes...
XXXI
XXXI
but all concurred that, truth to speak,
I might have seen you, heard you speak
By dire presentiment awestruck,
to hope that even once a week
She's fallen in the snow - alertly
suggests a victim richly decked...
at the Academic Diction-book.
more closely at the grammar-book;
by Lensky in his Olga's book;
goodbye to you, my true ideal,
the mountain maiden,19 my ideal,
and coachmen swear, and women squeal.
But he could draw a joking moral,
where can we find your equal?
But how she jumped, when in this hovel
lift up the gauzes of her veil,
and in full brilliance shines the ball.
lies in a coverlet that ripples
beauty with all its heavenly spell,
and what came out? a hairy, tumbled,
drank in your words when all was still --
in play with her obedient doll
has gone to Olga, swept the girl
but in Zaretsky he induces
Tatyana turned with thirsting soul:
And in their daughters' close embraces
XL
goes out into the courtyard spaces
and junior Ensign in the Guards.
freedom's enthusiastic dream,
a fop, a punter on the cards,
its barely noticeable stream.
persisted and made no amends.
for them by fathers who, as friends
insists, when the mazurka ends,
and festal evenings in the gloom.
to sing of others must imply
dressed up a desperate egoism
''Let's go.'' The friends, all haste and vigour,
are treated to the fullest rigour
Evgeny quietly began
They should be forced to read in Russian,
than households where the wife must moan
lay on the fields; in caravan
Then with a half-ethereal splendour,
So Lensky wrote, obscurely, limply
''You wrote to me, and nothing spoken
Chapter Seven
deaf to the voice of your despair?
exists for me one special pair!
we sometimes like to hear again
her full account of voiceless pain?
to raise the safety catch and strain
he found all kinds of brickbat hurled.
Like modish parquetry, the river
demanding: when will he reply?
even in joke the heart won't shiver.
He reads to Olga on occasion,
which, listening with some condescension,
He got so used to this immersion,
excited not a hint of passion:
to it the people's blessing never
And he was loved... at least he never
The night has many stars that glitter,
before such candour of expression,
Shade-like, in purposeless obsession
nothing was barred beyond discussion --
I'll float in gondola's seclusion;
and all our modish education;
Tatyana sees with trepidation
true, with a pistol he could shatter
that we enjoy equating chatter
panes patterned by the finest printer,
when our sublimest aspiration,
bitter-sweet glory's inspiration,
with our Mamas, and a sensation
Then gradually upon sensation,
no mannerism, no affectation,
trusted her without hesitation,
another bard1 in exaltation
where fate had fixed our confrontation,
must be to hold in detestation
but the unbending goddess-daughter
But you perhaps find no attraction
of passion's out, and its whole manner
who in the country spends her summer,
servant of God, and Brigadier.''
Reader, whatever fate's direction,
All right, you want the resurrection
became like brother knit to brother.
meticulously; in my fiction
I would have had the indiscretion
You'd never class her as a beauty;
a scream rings out... the cabin's quaking...
he strove to achieve the appropriation
her heartache, did it long compel her,
affected pose - and an unspeaking
Elbow on table, spirit seething,
and there, beneath your noonday sky,
without a trace of spite or plot,
and for her cheeks to cease their blushing;
scarce out of bibs, already fickle,
''But I'm denied this: all for you
it needs no gold if a supply
suddenly lowering eyes that languish,
Below it, when sprang rains are swishing,
on liquor, and on hay brought in,
and locked him in a dark recess.
his itching verse, Monsieur Triquet
XLIX
of Eugene, cold as all creation,
a word or two, or stare unseeing,
by country freedom, rightful pardon
she'd cheer my wordless way, and do
into a small quit-rent - and got
Tanya (profoundly Russian being,
&lt; Petushk&oacute;v's nails and spurs are sounding
He found them in some old collection,
In time past, objects of affection
lest he should by some clever trick
a brook flows through a grove of lime.
it was that he'd been truly stirred,
he sends a letter, penned with passion.
and strip the forest round about.
''My sweet, my dearest heart, I'm old,
XXXII
and scorned his fellows through and through,
in which the rhymester-man-of-fashion
XVI
and sleeping sounder than a rock.
It's over. Supper is proceeding.
burst to a fiery blaze in season?
wronged always in disgraceful fashion --
At least I'll give him some advice:
But soft! You hear? A scowling critic,
nothing you did gave cause for blame:
VII
''It's nothing.'' And away he flew.
At first Onegin's tongue produced
his Sunday game of cards with me.
but now grown plain and kind in stead,
so pure, so spotless through and through,
no boy, to fight or take offence --
&lt; that there existed, for the indulgence
solitude, stillness and the night,
outside and in they star the night;
in fashion's din, at still of night,
and country stillness: there the lyre
yet, truthfully and not in chaff,
and exclamations, and good cheer.
but where are all your evenings spent?''
of seeing the world? what on earth could be better?''
Your horse, blunt-shoed and all unwary,
his tea with rum quite left behind,
these words are not of Russian stock:
mills, lands and waters - he whose goods
From his first youth he'd known the force,
Meanwhile with pain her soul was girdled,
puts out the lamps; the whole brigade
engaged then - but against her will;
Tanya pursued them with her gaze...
a novel graced with such a name.
as infant sleep, or the unaffected
however much her soul has faltered,
let's go together, take a rest...
She hesitates, and doubts beset her:
the shady wood, the talking stream;
his mind, so cold and so precise.
his young heyday's supreme employment,
XXV
to meet his thirsty lips... What daze,
the magic voices of your stream,
have vanished, like an empty noise,
should have been analysed when caught,
But, even by accident, her passion
Drive on, Andryushka! quicker, quicker!
XII
So, verse and prose, they came together.
a lyre, and on it perched, a dove --
vexation? vainness? heavens above,
The manor house, in deep seclusion,
and blesses the unrivalled brand
how fearful, too, is my obsession
Which one comes first? It's just the same
in fact by some quite different thought.
the inmost thoughts that girls can hide.
But, did they not corrupt society,
To my astonishment I've seen her,
what wings our first successes gave!
LV
and never stir a foot away!
your night of fretting's left no trace!
for me to glimpse this Phyllis ever
interior d&eacute;cor in the end
come in and warm yourself a minute!''
of eloquence, and just the same
girls often change to their contentment
our native speech had never sprung
and, under, ''toute &agrave; vous Annette'';
you'll read: here's Pradt,7 here's Walter Scott!
the homely scene, take pleasure in it --
that I prefer to Champagne's tide;
champion of rights, as in the wrong.
of ardent speech, that aching flow
"When will the devil come for you?"
But who stands there, in this selected
where a sharp nail has made a dent.
My friends, the bard stirs your compassion:
dear ladies' feet fly past like hail,
perhaps, though Phoebus warns, I'll see
scarcely recalled their love, their spite;
their unattractive t&ecirc;te-&agrave;-t&ecirc;te;
like a true friend, to speak my name.
Moscow, loved daughter of Russia,
leave far behind that city-gate.
his lyre, now stilled, in its high mission
aad
it blabs, and spills them in its tracks.
you'll never leave me to my fate.
and tea's brought in. Instead of chimes
still has Monsieur Finemouche for friend,
as if spellbound, Tatyana stands.
the toll of those borne off by fate!
to bellow out: ''she's mine, she's mine.''
was finding leisure's vacuum cruel;
There, with epigrammatic neatness,
with tears, in quarters of the maids:
to see the grave, and shed a tear.
beneath bird-cherries and acacias
ditty portends a loss; more dear
from deepest backwood, furthest under...''
I gave my word, alas, though now
then know that your reproving finger,
the enjoyment of a friendly drink,
Tatyana now need wait no longer.
no time to pick it up - she's dying
XXXVI
Uncle, in bed, and near to dying,
Ah, gently, gently, easy goes --
was brought there by a huckster who
four fateful stairs. Then, without slowing
who never scorned the social rabble;
of reason's icy intimations,
you left no steps that could be tracked:
of hope is somehow still surviving
Praskovya re-baptized ''Polina'';
XXIII
XXIII
XLI
peasants, and fashion-shops, and sledges,
he fed on hope's deceptive dinner;
they nudged Tatyana, and each muttered
what feelings would assume control
in warmer airs was half dispersed.
Already now the talk was thriving
asked Lensky: ''Should we start, I mean?''
he murmurs: ''Olga's mine for saving;
the clamorous honking geese began
of children, though as young as they,
he had the talent of saluting
XI
and brandishes her tinsel splendour
I thought, she'll go this time, perhaps;
would have been spared this laceration.
then quickly something changed all this:
Can she have found the enigma's setting?
''The elegy's just vain protesting,
the matchwood chatters as it lights.
XLVIII
and jokes and spiteful gossip ran
The princess, sitting peaked and wan,
untouched by envy's bitter smarting,
on goose's neck, a skull looks cheerful
Enough, I tell you, that will do --
When out to burst a rival's bubble,
I lack the strength required to say
and frames would shudder, windows tremble;
on Olga; from heart's ache still spared,
no one recalls him or his verses;
The vote was passed without demur.
while Petersburg's already rousing,
like mindless youth, the waltz goes by
For it was custom that consoled her
Evgeny stood, with soul regretful,
as sacred, lies before me still.
XLIII7
would leave her dithering and tossing.
of childish pranks: a chilled reaction
in gossip's rambling and discursion
I longed, like every breaker hissing,
will loyally discharge its duties,
And while with all despatch he's dressing
made London's dandy his professor.
XXXVII
the nightingale's begun to sing.
treated his lessons as a ploy.
Who'll never fault our vices, or
and soon, oh soon the storm's arrears
Only from Tanya's heart, no cheering --
perplexed... and rooted to the ground.
XXXII
''So to strange kinsfolk I was taken...
set off our troubled mind comparing
in the far backwoods' deepest heart,
To me, unsmiling lips bring terror,
or for the modishly luxurious --
Tatyana's husband, now appearing...
and watch him stubbornly bring low
at this betrayal's fateful news?
XLIII
the giddiest hope, carefree and gay,
reap a brief harvest on their furrows;
At once Anisia came to greet her,
and from her eyes the eager tears
so brilliantly he'd hoax the fools,
Ahead of them a pinewood slumbers
XXVII
XXXI
those monkeys of the good old days:
but no, my Moscow never stumbled
moment the assembly seemed to shake...
were from his vision quite withdrawn.
one wallows in delicious weeping;
how bold or bashful there, and here
but now my brain is darkened, Tanya:
XVII
Here comes the yard-boy, who has chosen
For several days she peaked and pined
From early on she loved romances,
and autumn lingered, long and slow;
Dmitriev
of Twelfth Night's chillest, iciest air.
Risen with earliest rays of dawning,
five hundred years) for sure our byways
among the guests a general dinning:
they'd just enrage it with their dart.
I've paid my due to classic art:
so much, I'm left no time to speak!
And all the while the moon was shining
of love's anxiety. Blessed is he
reader, or where you've shone and glittered!
then sudden fear attacked Tatyana...
and sat there as the minutes crept;
But now the radiance of the moon
Yet once for him her thoughts had whirled,
More wine, he calls, to drench the flaming
God grant you took at least a grain.
across the public's toes; he steers
embodied by the power of dreaming,
what held me was my predilection,
the towers of whitestone Moscow beaming
he informed this envoy diplomatic
a rogue, a slanderer, a poltroon,
garden, a modest home, the place
sent to seduce? Resolve my doubt.
in talk, so fruitless and so stale,
but, lovely maiden, wilt thou not
and yawn in silence at the stage
''Sit down! how strange! it's like the stage
with Olga, all have pierced her soul;
XVII
and the Skot&iacute;nins, grizzled sages,
each object held a secret message
IX
of fate, and life, each in its turn
the best revenge one could desire.
let not the poet's soul of passion
at forty he'd have got the gout,
in darkness in her room, or treated
and held him briefly in their sway,
and swarming in his inmost soul.
before the fire a table's spread;
bludgeon the sense; it faints and whirls.
The storm is over,5 dawn is paling,
So let me with a kind expression
long, long ago... no, that could be
XVI
''Whither, oh whither are ye banished,
with comedies of swarm and din;
''it seems that he forgot us all.''
The evening passes, and meanwhile
he rested - wept for by his neighbours,
all modish foes dread worldly shame.
with brilliant conquests by the shower,
once more Corneille's majestic story;
And not because she'd read him, either,
And so they lived, two ageing mortals,
he goes ahead and parts the motley
and on the crumpled sofa too
and how's Tatyana? Olga too,
the poet's only theme is ''I.''
nonsense will earn indulgent looks,
LVI
herself not knowing how or why)
''Which neighbour, dear? My head became
was just created for the part.
drink in the midnight benediction,
shutters are up, and all is pale
XXVI
moonscape, the half-light overall,
resigned himself to prison's ties,
all blend into Eugene alone.
''As for the other one... tomorrow
how many follies were engendered;
no, Tanya's more endearing far.
away from trusting his own eyes.
they took offence at this, and broke
The invalid's glad salutation,
the threshold's thronged, wet-nurses call,
among the maidens and the wives,
When Eugene's turn for salutation
is the supreme reward. Precisely,
he'd got annoyed, the tricky devil.
he was a menace, and a freak.
''Get up, my child, it's time, get up!
the other, jugs of applejack,
by dint of cuff and kick and smack
as something not to be declared,
the units are ourselves alone.
the joys of youth, that festal cup,
across the fields, round hill and rock;
already she'd assume ill-luck.
that mediocre dress alone
wine of the Comet6 fills the cup;
what play will he present this week?
the eyes of all, the hooves, the snozzles,
we visit them, or without fail
a plain, unceremonious troop,
you too have seen on Neva's brink.
vanishes with his load of dread.
she lacked her sister's beauty, lacked
at the same moment in her ear:
to comfort her in all her woes,
two or three novels where our later
The kinsfolk in concerted action
for whom her passion has been planned
all that today we find absurd.
with lively and pellucid look,
Tatyana had a changeling look
almost as good as a dim lamp.
although one in no manner shares
open the window, sit down near.''
deep in distraction, his own rook.
and in a corner make him choke
a pretty girl exactly like
his Strasbourg pie, or point a moral,
Muse of the epic, bless my work!
and kept quite silent while she read.
with draughts from love's enticing flask,
the bear - what next? - behind her stalked.
for hours alone; she walked and walked...
on cups of coffee, and then later
dogged by one feeling, only one --
And every morning I awake
At feasts, though, full of pert aggression,
To face society's derision
in friendly gatherings where I read,
its natural right to rave and flare.
wound that had seared my Tanya's heart!
or stirring annalistic must;
the fateful diet; by depression
that moment, of a luscious pie
through distant regions of the heart...
as it assembles them around;
To Peter Alexandrovich Pletnev
he laughs - they all begin to chuckle;
but I refuse to chop or change.
of wandering tribesmen; while the ravage
the vital force gives them the shoot
earn for me the rewards of fame --
he'll take you prisoner, you'll admire
XLIV
I acted thoughtlessly or not:
jealousy's flame, to light desire;
though there he's no more to be found,
even by Ladies' Fashion Post,
But when the hour of youthful passion
pursue his love - and at one bound
and lives, a veritable sage,
with demoiselles of riper age;
XLIV
to ensure that till next time our image
Since when is this?'' ''Two years or more.''
made over to them his whole lot,
I was just thirteen years of age.
a glossary of smart argot...
madman, can you forget their print?
with jealousy beyond all measure
Walking her horse in introspection
Whom then to credit? Whom to treasure?
XLIX
XXIV
XXIV
unfathomable to the mind;
Eugene attends the boulevard,
where civil treacheries are rife,
spared her the expense she dreaded most --
no longer does the herdsman chase
reverie hounds you, and you find
my fate, it leads me to what end?''
he ended even your employment;
a life-creating voice was lost;
and leave no faint footprint of glory...
gentlemanly, quite precise,
now crush with sorrow's dull deployment
and like an arrow from a bow
into a corner, gently makes her
and tried to write, but a hard session
He's here - Monsieur Guillot, my friend.
Her feelings in their weary session
at first, with God knows whom to see,
''as sung of old, in years of glory,
kept asking: "shall I live to see"...''
Believe (as conscience is my warrant),
without a word Tatyana leant
resigned disposal of your fate.
would be allied to him by fate;
but you'll undoubtedly agree
in his first dream of passion's fruit,
boredom has just as sure an entry,
''Your modish world, I'll do without it;
my house, my evenings, all that state --
sits imperturbable, and free.
of simple product supplements it.
and after jealousy's grim weather
a soul of sympathy and grace,
their tendency to call, and sit.
How long he'd been here, was her query,
they sit, they cross themselves for grace.
but she (for women, that's not new)
Tatyana groaned above the tide;
yes, focus on them your lorgnette,
and an insouciant lorgnette.
beneath, a brook rolls its tribute
fortunate one, he'd not disgrace;
Ah, all that my Onegin knew...
Alas, Eugene beyond all query
stood in the door, cherubic, mute,
but now it bores me every minute.
reflection or provoked dispute:
now she's bereft, and just the same
and while the star still flew, she'd hurry
there gathered at the coffin-side
to see my kin, and in the end
for honour, a straightforward pride.
choruses, Tanya can but wait,
from day to day she could but wait;
as he descended to the grave.
on jam, and speeches in regard
and in a singsong voice confide
at last the final hours arrive.
and on their marks has made them stand;
No answer comes. He goes, for better
his destiny) without a smile
watch for your smile, and catch your gaze
the simple legend - then a haze
the letter from Tatyana's hand:
that, like proud Byron, I can draw
have been a fool; yet he'd a right,
a Lancer wooed and won her hand,
now warmth and blossom are on hand,
by Neva, on a summer night,
in terms of poetry or passion --
By dreams now sad in their conception,
and, still transparent to the view,
of many distant lands he sang
the pages of some dull review,
all was material for transcribing:
from any gentlemanly distance;
to his Tatyana, yes, he's racing,
Tatyana looks with pulses racing
or else disturb my mournful trance
of that old duellistic fox,
and Paris too. But hear my pleading:
again I see your soulful flight?
the blaze of candles, and the trembly
to my young days, it's time I turned
this child of luxury and delight.
absorbed me in the recollection
ingenious London has been sending
across to her consort a weary
He looks, and answers: ''Agafon.''4
but piteous he, the all-foreseeing,
X
In duels a pedantic don,
covered her face. When all came out
Still in the porch, exhausted-stupid,
came distant horns, and gallant singing.
When we draw a fellow in,
the hour was late. And now from aching
late of Tambov, Monsieur Triquet
Now Tanya's groaning, now she's sighing;
drives home - and plunging deeper in,
breaking the lilac bushes, smashing
on which the world is doomed to spin.
his awkwardness, he's hardly said
and pay my debt in the same coin
with an obeisance I'll hand over...
whose serfs are miserably thin;
and enviable for a poet,
Next day Tatyana, early waking,
a masculine disguise to aid
is this the man that you were seeking?
he danced attendance with the best;
She went - and Eugene, all emotion,
The hearth was low beyond all stoking.
no artifices of the vain...
that corps of social legislation --
her love obeys the laws of feeling,
and, hands a-tremble, Nyanya prayed
Tatyana leaves Onegin kneeling,
''Why, Tanya, what...?'' ''All's dull and trifling.
but where such hymns in my direction
so nearly had them in his power.
in darkest forest depths and drowned
is out of fashion in our time.
you loved the opulent contact
with pleasure on his vengeful act.
Zaretsky draws up a convention
or on the granite of the bay.
of jealous girls, devote its strain?
by now his bride-to-be has wed
Once Vy&aacute;zemsky,4 who chanced to find her
(a simile of this and that)
In Tanya, what a transformation!
radiance of Dian, sits in pain
magic of sleep had started claiming
when Br&eacute;guet's chime is heard proclaiming
Escaped from social rhyme and reason,
she's up and flying through the air
from waxen cell the bees again
to where he came to her that time
and then, indoors the livelong day,
rapture was just two weeks ahead;
the youthful lover once again
How many times I made a toy
a deft arrangement to his hair,
In the two sisters' rooms extended,
my thoughtless pen has stopped designing,
''The morning star will soon be shining,
and so, before the world of learning,
That isn't our immediate worry:
the thirst for work, the lust for learning,
the same as any other day.
whisper of breeze announces morning,
at earliest morning out she started,
begs your indulgence - it's been spun
the unmetric verses of tradition
no years of absence past returning,
she walked, but just as she was turning
and the derivative Knyazhn&iacute;n:8
Olga's adorer comes a-wooing.
He sees: in slush, stretched out and keeping
Louder and louder sounds the wrangle:
because some glance of his has bitten
and all our fresh imagination,
''I write to you - no more confession
I'll go, I'll go!'' - and in a stir
is softly, indolently sleeping,
''No, every minute of my days,
before his eyes, imagination
in which so lately it abounded
and rest myself from earlier days.
no, nothing caused his heart to stir,
with old Anisia. The next day
Baratynsky
of Gulnare, he would play a card
in the saloon, brocade-surrounded,
Here stands, with shady park surrounded,
too long, against my inclination,
always monotonously gay,
There was a period when cold-blooded
One melancholy fop, declaring
our joy in you is warmly taken.
two poles that ice had glued like plaster
allow no rest to you or me;
you find the country godforsaken;
the indifferent, or the deadly serious!
when little notes come on a tray.
(in the romantic style, we say,
if I, like you, had been a bard.
The years incline to gloom and prosing,
too weak to change, I'm staying vicious,
new guest is gradually progressing,
whose kindly hand will ruffle down
''It's nothing, nurse, nothing, I say...
a block of snow will slip and tumble.
in rose-trimmed bonnets, but malicious;
the eager players are enrolled --
to the Larins' had caused a spout
in indolence and in rampageous
meantime she'd give the maids a beating
of prejudice that's never been
He was too young to have been blighted
of happy love. For I have been
the girls sing out the ancient rhyme:
Onegin had no word to say;
she sees it all. The simple maiden,
the flower-like pallor of the maiden,
I know, Godsent one, I'm protected
touches obliquely, but with speed,
visit the family, what d'you say?
flows and reverberates. Reciting,
Here's tea: the girls have just, as bidden,
Weltered in tears, and sorely smarting,
to lift his pistol up. A span
So a disabled soldier-man,
for her improvement, a roman,
or make men seriously discuss
and even honourable man:
for him all sham has found rejection,
she lowers darkened eyes, unwitting,
''She's not in love?'' ''There's no one, ever.
look here, as a provincial miss
still powdered is Luk&eacute;rya Lvovna,
at soldier-husbands, and the drum.
to look like sad romanticism.
Napoleon's our sole inspiration;
Why then do you pursue me now?
and bending deeply down to greet her
and entered. Ballroom overflowing...
The sky breathed autumn, time was flowing,
one customary grief each hour!
There was a pine-branch downward straying
among my friends, in all that crowd
and where he'd silently agreed.
before Onegin there collected
Beneath storm's vestment, on the seaway,
the rosy sealing-wafer's drying
her to the altar and the crown.
he really forced one to admire him --
inns don't exist; but in a freezing
for you, I think, the humble dimness
It's true, I'll not misrepresent them,
dear companions, darling friends,
I hear the wrath of your reproach.
so that all three went off to lunch,
By enemies, no less by friends
no, all devoured by passion's madness
condemned the millstones as a sham.
ladies at the fireside confer,
a rooster head, and on the twitch
on the cotillion, as amends.
could have been turned to worthier ends --
breaks a new passage with his sleigh;
I know too surely how it ends.
I know to what malicious laughter
the total ownership of woods,
with an avowal just as artless;
Sbogar,8 mysterious through and through,
We all resemble more or less
who in the dark came flashing through
meanwhile a hallboy handed cream;
crossed to the window, read it through.
each coldly plans the other's slaughter...
and to it, with a grave import,
and from the salon the princess,
''Farewell, you realms that own the sway
Rousseau (forgive a short distraction)
L
the only face to shake and pass
that, for all this, my shame's report
into an unbecoming brawl.
high time he should be on his way.
by all is sweetly mutilated,
No doubt about it, it's Eugene.
pans, mattresses, and trunks, and chairs,
ever so roughly rocked my soul!
this was our heroes' conversation
only to Eugene showed their worth;
and wrecked the flooring-boards for good;
Remember the retort satiric!
to whom your hearts are dedicated,
not bad at all; and then each soul
struck down as if she'd been accused,
to expose to Moscow fops and Circes
by six-page letters, rings and tears,
and wore his dressing-gown to dine.
each of us has his favourite lobby:
VIII
and skids and tumbles down; the cheerful
that marble Nina's proved unable
whispered by heart a note addressed
Unforced, as conversation passed,
the shepherd, as he used to do,
and clasps her neck; and now she sees
XXVIII
XXXVIII
XIII
a monster of the gens Satanic,
a book of household calculations,
XXXIII
XXXIII
his nature would be changed and steadied,
XLII
to sleep some black and empty dreams;
As far removed as they were able
He gave his arm. In sad abstraction,
then, help me God, she caterwauls:
XVII
empire, and fled it; happier still
XVII
Blest he who in his youth was truly
The Song of the Girls
in winter, on the cast-iron fender,
XXXVII
Priam-like agricultural sages,
Lensky's estate, there lives and still
lifts her from bed as it foretells
a rest from toil and all its aches,
XII
Street lamps go flashing by, and stalls,
a skeleton jerked by a cable,
that spring with me has had its fill
he's happy, yes, he's almost well...
in his small shack, will listen well
just what the nightmare signifies.
XXXII
sweet talk with friends. How many days
she finds it stifling here... she strains
could it be she... or had he dreamed?
Since then Martin Zad&eacute;ka's spell
helping the poor, or while I mended
he heard in stillness and in din
across the years to our own time.
the man she feared and idolized --
runs after what is sweet, and vain.
once more that touch is fiercely troubling
my span, that fortune's jurisdiction
sentiment, notebook, verses, all
something to fritter and to burn,
I'll end my tale some other time.
he read of course the sceptic Bayle15
But now! what brings you to my feet?
our Mother Eve: we're never falling
by drozhkies jaunting at full power
and trains a mirror till it faces
to Eugene all was new and thrilling;
but Eugene hasn't moved; for certain
and in the morning wouldn't know
then night comes on; the moon's patrolling
Could it not be that by convention
the children spoilt, the mad, the rogues
IX
I'll save this blossom on the shoot,
and ruled him like an autocrat --
will reach, and past the tomb's compound
L
''Make way, make way,'' goes up the shout;
bound where the magic bow will send her,
She dreamt of portents. In her dreaming
Dear Tanya, you're condemned to perish;
to hit the target: thigh or brain.
Farewell, Petrovsky Castle, glimmer
and records of a heart in pain.
the blood came smoking from the wound.
No, all in her was calm and plain.
he's got consumption. In his anguish
as fresh as ever, for its graces
she flails around, she tries to shout --
Tsimlyansky wine, between the meat
LVII
three pairs of handsome ones - yet there
objective of his thoughts and joys:
With reason, too: for when he'd vetted
She was like him and always sported
came out so soft, it scarce was heard.
He'd brought back all the fruits of learning
no sound by which her soul is stirred.
pinker than glow of Northern morning,
Tatyana hears but takes no part;
they're all chained up in different fetters,
On an old aunt, who's long been burning
for the young pilgrim. So at last
what odes Vladimir might have written --
Reader, I wish that, as we parted --
but soon the ways we trod were parted
The choirs of dancers sought their quarters.
and stops his doleful heart from sleeping:
but for the effect that he created
Moscow has beauties and to spare:
haphazard; so, to God be thanks,
yes, even there its triumph grows.
But it was passion that preempted
the bear has raised her in his paws;
thought them a pointless peccadillo;
he almost lost his mind, expired,
to all this tattle, yet at heart
whatever you may need, just call...
fraught with enticement and disaster?
in all the world could take my heart!
You husbands, deeply I respect you!
bright summer days that passed so slowly,
thank you indeed. Alike in sorrow
and gallops. Pistols made for pairing
Departure date's long overtaken;
the prince looks at him, and replies:
lend ears to my lugubrious tone:
in lives that were just dawning then.
the jams appear in little dishes;
the pensive Dryads' hiding-ground.
(on orders which of course presume
across each bush, across each steep,
XLIII
the unworthy husband through depressing
we'll go with her to that delicious
Lensky, restored to his manorial
LI
is firmly cast. I don't know whether
of Muses' offspring; sitting down
With that, in tears, and quite worn out,
they all have richly earned a pension;''
How often would I fall to musing
''My sweet, God warrants me your debtor.''
and self-oblivion was his art!
return an answer, blunt or keen,
Her tender touch had never fingered
the lust for blood drew them apart?
the guests squeeze closer to the centres;
we'll keep love's price appreciating,
that verse will turn to useful duties;
Perhaps some secret apprehension
Then what resulted from the meeting?
love's melting dreams shall fill my rhyme,
Who on earth is he? not... our hero?
through the back porch runs out and flies
on visits to us, and in greeting
Whether the arrow has my number,
XXVII
from her my lips will learn and mark
We too shall find our hour is waiting;
XVIII
Three whole hours, at the least accounting,
''For then, Onegin, I was younger,
in fashion that's half-glad, half-anguished:
is brought to table at full speed.
(my tale's beginning here repeats);
fieldward, in noisy swarm, the bees.
paled, flushed, or lost composure's grip --
XVIII
XI
Only the estate provides a setting
his spindly, shaggy nag. As fitting,
for them, in Butterweek5 the greaseful,
declares itself in ways unwitting --
look through the pane, and squash the flies.
to her glass porch; pursues her round
the subtle spouse was just as loyal --
lies bright, and vast beyond perceiving;
At first they called; but on perceiving
The north wind blows, the clouds are driving --
doubted of it, so lived in bliss.
(if you'll turn back to chapter one)
though what's romantic here I simply
and always the self-same objection;
Young ladies jump for future blisses...
your dashing one, is she surviving?''
whispers some ballad of the hour,
those words where love, without condition,
XXXVIII
past all the assembly in a whirl,
let evening pass, tomorrow too --
rumours and threats and premonitions,
and warmed the Chinese teapot; flowing
She's paid the sunrise no attention,
past ice-blocks, blue and squared away,
in pairs, their hunger driving stronger,
will anger you in its confession.
it's new to us, beyond gainsaying;
the sumptuous palais shines out;
by now he's driving home to dress.
XIII
Friendship, as I must own to you,
''where master used to sit alone.
I weep, and pray for your protection..,
Griboedov
you help him to an honoured fate
XIX
alone across the fields of space,
condemned to a lifetime of hard,
and captive girls, by Salgir20 lying.
some future dunce will point a finger
yes, in that spring-time, in low-lying
the grey-haired nurse with kerchiefed head;
XLV
proclaims where ponderous P&uacute;styakov
the hapless Phrygians all the same,
O dreams, o dreams, where is your sweetness?
''No, no, I'm sure the party's small.
XXIX
but madrigals I've got to write!
but I, in love, was dull and dumb.
the expanse of fields, so wide, so lonely,
XLV
with trees decked in their silvery kit,
She loved the balcony, the session
a lady - what a grim discussion! --
I find no sense; the truth is this,
Now here's a letter, as you see,
Giving his pistol-butt a squeezing,
and neighbours, followed the same ends.
the new moon, horned, on her left side,
when we begin to talk of verse);
and every man won't understand it
I'll just remark, my verses talk
to talk as if with heart unwrung,
stalking the momentary weakness,
''This is Vladimir Lensky's grave
has something low and unrefined.
past the grand ladies, see her glide;
promptly had nothing left to give.
XXV
to ask of you that you transcend
XXXIV
where's the high aim, the ardent sense
but youthful, virgin hearts derive
and prone to censure in our thought;
His father failed to understand
such frank tendresse; away they stole
XXXIV
Tanya is gripped. No comment's made
XXV
to drive the swooning senses mad;
freedom and peace, in substitution
''But tell me, which one was Tatyana?''
No moralizing from this joker;
XXXIX
more searching than Chateaubriand;
we weep for the young lover's end,
of trumpet, dagger, mask and sword,
Arrived apace, he gives the word
in first place - listen, am I right? --
sought in her book, that text of danger
his head upon her shoulder... blaze
as helpmeet in my sad existence,
felicitously every theme,
cold, pure as ice, and as unkind,
thank him by curtseying to the dust;
or pining, Olga's hours were brief.
''My goodness, how the years do fly!''
who'll clap an entrechat, or scoff
they leave their shores and fly away.
and then a drozhky's clopping sound
seacoast, to hear in dark of night
she brought her talents, never ceased,
already stirred him as they should.
it's also true, in battle's rapture,
in our first ages), from no place
where in the heart of silence rang
all these are charming! but to put
the bliss that fills me when your throbbing,
why, at the thought, my husband's mother
that wicked, loose-tongue chatterbox...
and no one's ear could take offence
was asked around as quite a catch --
gay nature and its sparkling distance!
there's far too much of contradiction,
it melts, away it rushes, racing
how I interpret this expression:
''Who? that fat general?'' Tanya cried.
was still mysterious and enticing --
with puzzled and confused regard...
We each have enemies in this world,
of distant countries, of moonlight...
ready to share our quiet leisure
In summertime - for he was leading
the jagged flint's pulled back anew.
the war, the snowfall, and his wife.
sweet as a lover's kiss, and dear,
O flowers, and love, and rustic leisure,
without preliminary feeler
in their gay glass, the borrowed light
Vladimir drops, hand softly sliding
''why, Olga's younger, and she's bedded.
are bound, by every virtuous wife,
still after many years in place.
and there, love's protestations, binding
so, seeing there no rhyme or reason,
glitters beneath its icing-sliver;
The Larins kept the old tradition:
or servants waiting on her pleasure.
And the sly baseness, fit to throttle,
shutters are opened and the soft
XXXIII
This world's so vacuous that it's got
the bear let out a roar, and held
by some perverse schoolboy for sport;
its wayward tricks, its violent surging,
and watched a different world unroll.
audacious tunnels will be marching:
''What, Grandison? oh, Grandison!
''One winter's worth, you've surely got;
he's up the steps, with heart a-quiver
our troikas effortlessly dashing,
in sledded coaches and coup&eacute;s,
you'll recognize him soon enough, --
He's gone away and left his village,
she roams the empty garden-plot...
with deep emotion through and through,
XIV
to life grew colder than the dead.
the one who killed the youthful poet?''
Who in the princess for that second
if I show wit in jesting thus.
The house is packed out; scintillating,
it can't be youth's distemper - love?
now things are changed, now we resemble
of five more steps they went, slow-gaited,
of other's thought - a splendid goal;
Here insolent prize-dandies wither
but you're not paying any heed.''
LVIII
aged Derzh&aacute;vin1 saw and blessed us
and, on the crosses, jackdaw hosts.
to me so simply, with the fires
coquettishness has got no trace --
unswerving friend, correct landowner,
XIX
the usurers' voracious tribe.
what came from this unlooked-for meeting;
then, on the last page, the suggestion:
of ruts that grace our fatherland.
fits us as if it were our own?
a blank default would suit me better.
that lady the hostess was greeting,
Oh, I've no strength... I'm tired, my chest...
O spring! o time for love! how sadly
just at this crisis of his gale,
On these, with something like obsession,
and, in the yard, stand eighteen jades.
He's neither died, nor lost his reason,
sometimes from a fair, black-eyed maiden
In time, who knows, the agitation
any Madonna by Van Dyck:
invariably, as time went on,
What sort of roses, in your notion,
and Werther, martyred and doom-laden,
straight to his stall, then turns his glasses
XXXV
how well he knew the way to hurt --
As if before some mournful parting
his thrusting horns, and as he passes
in her own home. She never took
then on the leaves of recollection,
with fire from every cross of gold.
Happy a hundredfold, whoever
screened by a hill from storm's intrusion,
LII
a soul so innocent, so trusting.
claiming Tatyana'd found her man;
XVIII
XIX
my strange, incorrigible man.
Tanya comes to in utter fright...
will find the ice elude his grip
I
XXXV
the quintessential reaction
or else a novel.'' ''And my daughter
his elegies flow like a brook.
your heels will squash the ladies' toes! &gt;
come to disturb me and affright.
Boston and ombre for the old,
Each others' and their own successes,
XXVIII
and still exempted from removal
XXXIX
I'll stop that tempter from depraving
yet, as each rule has its exception,
sad meditations in her look,
has found a port for his old age,
Tatyana pined in secret fashion:
drunk, eaten, yawned, grown weak and stout,
and good and bad are all mixed up. &gt;
Evgeny waits: and here comes driving,
Zizi, my crystal and my gem,
XXX
There sings the nightingale, spring's lover,
evoke for you a sombre bliss;
really more bearable to you
The bitterness was mine - the ice
when, on the plain, green herbs are massed,
of course! you're bidden there next week.''
His unexpected apparition,
''How can one not love mother Moscow?''
thinking: he loved me, and in strife
Once home, he brought out and inspected
methodical by disposition,
can yet keep nail-care much in mind:
the prejudices of the ages,
has voices that are more resounding,
you see the two in uniform...
hereditary foes they seem,
commands our rhymester-brotherhood:
a modish taste, a dowdy touch --
she never read a Russian paper,
my golden days when spring was dear?
endorsed by fashionable rabble,
Searching the table exegetic
may spend a century in flaying
More tolerant in his conception
with the unmistakeable sideview
your cold discourse, were less unkind --
he and Onegin start alluding
my inept pupil, at that hour,
is deep in love, just like a boy;
anticipates a swim, in stead
dowagers smiled as she went by;
will in my soul be hushed and dying.
''How Tanya's grown! I pulled your ear
together they arrived, and none
she never joined, or skipped, but rather
Today... the sad memorial's lonely,
and leant upon the granite shelf;
the thought of volatile renown.
then I'd have looked for you alone
By now the shades of night are flying,
with spinning noise and senseless flashing
may wind up my career as poet;
XLVI
for him, at night, before the indulgence
As, lovingly, in his confession,
all this, at eighteen years of age,
Noise, laughter, bowing, helter-skelter
might have resounded long and loud
What of it? it's euphonious, pleasant,
rewards the music of your mind
his children and his faithful wife,
in Russian winters thrilled at seeing
within her bosom to abate,
and useful goods of every kind.
of moralistical persuasion,
my tedious taste for feeling free.
or for that Demon4 of my dream.
and silently he hung his head.
since I'm a member of the same.
who can combine it with the free
Her eyes were opened, and she said
they while away the morning's calm.
So now be off to Neva's brink,
his wit, according to the rules
IV
I read with secret pain, and never
for witty; in his Gallic way
''She's mine!'' Evgeny's voice of thunder
its image, then to swoon before
Was it for you that I became
an elegy to her address,
there caustic Shakhovsk&oacute;y8 came in
the merchant's up, the cabman's walking
in midst of trouble, storm or din.
XLIV
and with no post, no work, no wife,
whom shall we never find a bore?
And he remembers, in the quiet
before a cold, indifferent crowd,
became their scrutiny's concern.
avert his chest from pistol's click,
XXVI
He deemed, in general, letters vain,
of plains where boredom reigns complete,
is ''Kit''3 to every maiden's ear.
has taken on a silvery gleam;
nor crawled in suppliant attire.
the doorway opened wide to meet her,
with her own forests and her meads...
a parodistic raree-show?
XXVI
at fifty, would prolong the story
her secret work of magic suasion!
Oh, this could all be false and vain,
I drag my footsteps hither, yonder;
a joking flirt, or both together,
of house-familiars stands dismayed...
II
Tatyana flushed, and started shaking.
at any time he'd be prepared.
fresh from the cot, an infant pickle,
of certain ladies' tiny feet.
a patriot, a cosmopolite,
she's turned up in my garden, bringing
light dreams for new ones... so we see
in her torn heart - a fickle gleam;
at hours, which, why I cannot think,
to clasp your knees, and at your feet
and yet in her you'd not detect --
advises him of dinner-time.
wished him to come and say farewell.
I'm blind to every apparition;
and tears were drowning her regard.
for her, no joy from winter-time,
the cold perfection of the sky,
and the poet, without a sound,
enormous bear; Tatyana yelled,
Presently Olga's ringing answer
of rugs, and carpets' rich refinement.
Meanwhile, attired for morning strolling
something like spleen, that scourge of Britain,
while odes have high and noble aims...''
it had no sparkle of sensation,
while dear Tatyana's youth grows dimmer:
her kindness, move Tatyana; yet
and put his glasses on to see
to A&yuml;'s vintage in the sequel
with Tolstoy's2 brush, or decorated
my Africa,18 where waves break high,
still filled with Eugene, Tanya wrote,
XL
and jolly magpies on the flit,
LI
how brilliant with its instant tear!
and sang me to the altar-mat.
are almost bursting; she's quite ready,
And every minute his lorgnette
pursue his pencil. Everywhere
in question, gossip, news and tale,
on modish malice, coarse of grain
All who behold him find him strange.
just like a casual guest who might
but wildly still her heart is rushing,
loved someone else, not her intended,
will give you a complete reply.
she can't make out a single fraction
fire of the cutlets' scalding fat,
his pup to grace the sledge, while he
still shivering in the bitter weather
and for a chuckle or a smile.
in the full beauty of its frown;
His hair was fashionably curled,
At first I thought it out of season
came driving to his country seat,
in terms where not a word was spared:
''Maidens, pretty maidens all,
and swaggers in a red calpack;
Always our fervid hero tended
It's late. A breeze begins to roister,
young traitresses by the platoon,
I like to tell the time by dinner
to drop all that old-fashioned mumming;
the sufferings of tempestuous passion;
Another had the skill to ravish
fruit liqueurs and an Almanack
the regimental band is coming,
fresh as a poppy-flower, your face.''
with broods of children of all ages,
Blest he who's left the hurly-burly
and has no knowledge of deceit?
On this we'll part; goodbye again!
He could have spoken without harming,
who on a deuce, that famous cheat,
another, and his memory's fled
with fright, she hears the approaching bear;
now disenchanted with the next,
she holds a letter up, and leaning
so gloriously he'd fool the clever,
was one who raged and raged again,
as scarlet heels have lost their name
To batten down their indignation
same Pom, same husband to the end;
hymns of the ages never sound.
Lensky ingenuously related
then quietly at last says she:
XIV
and with its feeble glow outlining
And someone's heart will feel a quiver,
forward or back? it's true that he
till then had been dispersed and wasted --
or did her grief soon find repair?
a hundred times afresh distorted;
oblivion of life's stormy ways,
a hidden beauty in the end:
it may be late, but it's a start.
on tragedy; but it's no joke,
Another page of recollection:
''Last night, what made you fly so early?''
my last poor lepton for a sup!
I'm old, my mind is blunted, Tanya;
But he, by sad and rocky ways,
I've run a mile, I must avow,
Was she the Tanya he'd exhorted
replies: ''We might as well.'' They walk
So there she stood, forlorn, deserted!
no dream. You'd scarce arrived, I reckoned
into the fields, surveys the morning,
The arbitrary rules of passion
is on his feet - in utter stillness
Forsake, indulgent reader - driven
the world's &eacute;clat, its thunder-roll,
will blossom into splendid highways:
sensitive ladies of all ages --
with bended knees a windmill dances,
''Another!... No, another never
to captivate, and then to fly.
she wrote in French... what a confession!
I married. I beseech you, go;
moved and surprised, she stays serene,
one day came down that lonely turning,
already studying to intrigue,
He was no fool; appreciated
you acted well, that dread occasion,
of our first meeting face to face,
he saw that, as in cities, here
sit on a flimsy bench, and lays
to whom, in a fine flow of preaching,
No ice and flame, no stormy weather
There once I too strolled back and forth:
in grief that nothing else could mend;
no paradise can stay serene.
when we see him from afar,
a full confession of the heart.
VII
how envious was I of the waves
installed in me a different devil,
on kennels, and on kith and kin,
make Juvenal his text, or better
She's dropped her sash's silken billow;
He destined Olga's hand for me,
take leave of my lightheaded youth!
and brains, and an attractive face.
tomorrow just like yesterday.
the stars, the moon - celestial light
Or, as by Lethe's bank he slumbered,
come, trouble my imagination,
to the beginning of our days.
the country's pretty stupid here!
Napoleon here, intoxicated
XII
I'd still like dances to this day:
fancies, my rhythmic search for truth,
thoughts of a girl, or as the moon
is this the riddle's missing clue?
its newness with our faded days,
But now Aurora's crimson fingers
The better to dispel her sorrow
the books then underwent inspection...
right in the flower of joyous hope,
of human friendship, holy men,
none listens when the others speak,
bored with hilarity, and weary,
Chapter Six
and so in the salons could make
yet a capricious inclination,
Hoar-frost that crackles with a will is
far from it! just one more collapse.''
A sorry state of things, it's true!
we'd better hasten to the ball,
and sets her gently on the floor.
stays fixed and focused on a vision
however scarlet; free from error
swiftly decayed beyond recall
with tenderness he'd watched and noted
Tatyana had no dolls to dandle,
if, motionless, no life appearing,
they rise and ripen and fall dead:
Now, Lensky, would it be so bad
XXXIV
Between the lines of text as printed,
what dream accounts for her distraction?
an ace a dozen yards away;
a passer-by; and on tiptoe
Pistols are out, they gleam, the hammer
here's tea that Olga's been preparing;
While under the connubial banner
grow cold, and hard, and stiff as stock,
lacing her stays up very tightly;
Olinka and her mother sent:
no beauties of a foreign clime,
Seeing herself as a creation --
I love my Tatyana too much!
Or from all notion of enjoyment
his serfs rejoicing at their lot.
''At the Larins'!'' ''But how mysterious.
Beds are made up; the guests are all
no one was ever so engrossed:
immortals picked by fate for when,
Such feckless passion - as I live,
even if he drops or pines away.
log cabin a pretentious-teasing
and dinner with a touch of idle
so circumspect, and so punctilious,
Proud Albion's lyre is what I follow,
entered his sentence in the books.
Yet - fear itself she found presented
Tatyana'd rise by candlelight.
for her instruction, and her breast
Once more he turned to books, unchoosing,
to drown the hiss of modish wives.
they were her only food... and so
a novel, vague and superficial,
and every day its own enjoyment?
to his disputing and his cursing;
with whom your thoughts are so obsessed --
I pray God grant his soul salvation,
as gay as morning and as clear,
to undertake their resurrection,
her progress at the masquerade.
Protect me from such apparition
facing a belle I loved with passion,
he warns his man for duty, stressing
and on their captivating trail
to smother her dear feet with kissing.
hear my confession as I stand
their southward flight: one saw approaching
X
over the modish word ideal,
in sultry sleep, in lonely bed,
as smoke in azure sky disperses.
stiffening as the hours go by,
approaches Olga; Lensky's signed
I know (and seek your exculpation)
peopled my sleep, and to their theme
in winter was her heart's delight.
expecting winter, nature waited --
''Look quickly to the left, d'you hear?''
too faint to stir a further pace:
its work, its torture, its enjoyment,
enquired the lady of the hall:
is dimmed. Down there the valley soon
frightened to death a timid love,
with our poor girl was kind and good;
he watched the guests and, as he dined,
the bloom has withered on the bough;
how well she'd studied her new role!
onto the porch, and fussed about
a vivid brush, a witty rattle --
would cause widespread remark and tattle,
must be my theme, if you'll allow.
if her cross mood was at its worst --
with eyes of love, with greed to swallow
gives way to nature's normal passion:
misunderstanding, noise, and blame!
In languid silence, or the flame
rings proudly in that sombre name.
at eighteen years, to some compassion.
while men, all sombre, all the same,
when he arrived; not in the slightest:
of listening like a judge-supreme
in other things you come off best:
in twilight of all&eacute;es of lime.
Yet sweeter far, at such a time,
''To...?'' ''Larina.'' ''Tatyana? never!''
youthful, who ripened in his time,
or worse, to a soir&eacute;e. Unheard
out of the hand of that same bard:
Only the ode, that solemn story!
bear, blackness, blizzard, bridge and crow,
He was without that dithyrambic
Chapter One
he's left sad footprints on the ground.
stood thunder-struck. In what wild round
by dreary snowdrifts piled around;
secret sledge-rides in verse of fire;
Pleasant, in spite of its compression,
LIX
I could describe here his attire;
and where had he arrived from, not
could they not laugh out loud, before
self-portraits only - furthermore
Who is there who will truly measure
remains unmoved: still he's persistent,
He goes inside, corpse-like of feature...
wedlock for us would be abhorrent.
then afterwards, alone, at ease,
her out-of-fashion turns of phrase,
with heart that's grown unused to praise,
I never lived or wrote for praise;
or, with an epigram-surprise,
XIX
give me the homely hearth, and lend...''
by the cold world's corrupt finesse;
The book displayed, not so you'd know it,
frozen in his tight-fitting suit;
of sumptuous flowers and luscious fruit.
before him roast beef, red and gory,
''All right, I'll come then...'' ''What a friend!''
He saw the sad girl's trembling state,
His life went sailing in calm weather;
XXIX
beside unfinished lines, a suite
with cranium aching fit to split;
their looks and language in deceit
Who could have looked the poet better,
or else... or else, may God forfend it!
Chapter Five
whose heart on dreams was wont to thrive,
repeats what her mama has taught.
and took a mortgage on his land.
men made their bows, and sought her eye;
arrives, the girl's exhausted gaze,
each grips his pistol in his hand.
I leave the verdict in your hand.
until the grave by your strong hand:
So you, inspired Yaz&yacute;kov,4 sobbing
to steal away her neighbour's light
Tatyana shared with full conviction
what's in them? All this loud parading,
the millions of two-legged creation
shall my sad gaze no more alight
but, inside brackets, I'm contending
''The peasants there have wealth abounding,
he'd sack the Muses and get wedded;
his beasts outdoors at dawn, nor ringing
on ballroom's looking-glass parquet
XX
XX
Then, after midday he'll be waking;
and put a cross-sign on the maid.
Straight up the chimney, pipes were smoking.
They buzz - but then all talk's suspended --
rebuffed, found instant consolation;
She wanders on without direction.
and soon will day's bright tune be played;
so, full of heart-felt tribulation,
urbane betrayals, and the chilling
there сzerov8 shared the unwilling
gossip, and tricks, and the patrolling
how proudly, how divinely gleaming,
and wakened Lensky by exclaiming:
of gossip, and set comment humming
had long been wasting and enslaved
that she's so trustful, and imbued
as all things did, to bore him; homing,
and, on my bed-head gently leaning,
If Tanya'd had the chance of learning
devoted to the Muse, or learning,
Between them, every topic started
shelter for trysts at every turning;
to wiser words and deeds, and learned
the shades of night within their keeping
Now, she devours, with what attention,
motionless as one soundly sleeping
her golden earrings off and whipping;
A thought was born, and quickly noted...
the downy woods are greener-tinted;
struck for Evgeny, with its play
in tears and violent tossing vented
Now brooding thoughts hold his attention
they kill the zest of rhymed composing,
his nag has smelt the snow, and planted
''The man's a boor; his brain is missing,
I still find Gallicism delicious
she sang of childhood's fun, indited
Let me look back. Farewell, umbrageous
love's crown, delectable, awaited
Suddenly, from a crest, she sighted
''I noticed once, at our chance meeting,
and whist, that's now so keenly f&ecirc;ted --
Lensky disliked the entertainments
Thronged by adorers, I've detected
there's crashing, rumbling, pounding, trotting,
and band already tired of blowing,
and good old sun more seldom glowing;
''Whose glance, provoking inspiration,
field-work, and walks with inspiration,
time was when morning's breeze was swaying
Two weeks the matchmaker was plying
else, having found his pleasure cloying,
with careful schemes of decoration
is it not true that Russian speech,
Petrarch
held in constraint by pity's touch:
battling along that watery freeway,
a liar still, Lyub&oacute;v Petrovna,
with a blunt cue for the duration,
''I've dreams and years past resurrection;
to the empty homestead made her way,
To talk, to general conversation
to eat and drink, then separated
(as I've so oft in jest related)?
flicker of swiftly twirling pairs,
won't even cross their minds by stealth...
I'll part them, bring them back together;
just send your grandson on his way.''
your pride, some answer, or in truth
though we... don't shine in any way,
LIII
VIII
my little feet, where have you vanished,
II
poor Tanya more intensely burns;
XIII
Such were a young rake's meditations --
the rosy bloom that glowed so newly
and he believed his friends were ready
the silence when our talk had ceased!
and life celestial's phantom gleams,
XLVII
Why, pretty one, you're up already!
XXVII
XXVII
thrives to this moment, in a station
boys, country women, stately halls,
''Come to me in my golden halls.''
debauchery was praised, and studied
the bleeding tongues, the tufted tails,
and not because she'd once preferred
in these last years all mixed and fluttered.
nor will my scribbling in such books
if you come with me, they'll be flattered;
before the window taking station,
shall I see you?'' As Tanya speaks
XXXVI
XXXVI6
XI
XI
like fluff before Aeolian breezes;
XXXI
of traveller's tedium at its peak:
they managed to disperse the pack.
and never played a shrewder trick.
Eugene has caught up, quick as quick,
finding in that no deprivation --
all sorts of hopeless appetites;
parterres, she runs to rivulet's brink,
the heart inside him seemed to shrink;
first flakes of snow whirl round and sink
What? Invitations? Yes, three houses
he sounds, in lyric frenzy sunk,
the footmen sleep on the pelisses;
had left the squire no time to look
The olden days, I want to hear...''
taken the saucers in their grip,
has come with Kharlikov; he passes
the letter trembles in her grip;
you made me drunk as one could ask!
Buy&aacute;nov tried - got flea in ear.
and jam in jars, and household wares,
the maidens all are slumbering deep.
by what's called machinal reaction,
its views, its passions, or its cares!
how many lines of verse, and themes
let me acquaint you on the nail
''You yawn, Onegin?'' ''As I'm used to.''
and still within, behind the veil
brigade of liveries in the hall,
guests bow, feet scrape, and children squall.
Lord Byron's portrait on the wall,
is needed, nothing's left to tell.
to tales that young moustachios tell.
Onegin, drenched with sudden chill,
in my long task, be my upholder,
of work made him feel sick, and still
he scowls - and the whole gang are still;
is he who's never felt its will,
present her languor and distraction
Now the mazurka sounds. Its thunder
her heart speaks to her even louder
XL
For what charade is he apparelled?
although there are no streets, no cards,
I had most surely never reckoned
the bank, the immobile stream are levelled
retired, as he, from fashion's stream,
some ladies preach from Say and Bentham,
then later slyly he'd revile them
stretched on a sofa, calls to greet them.
A backward look is fraught with danger;
and thoughts of her were what inspired him
already there she stands beside him;
the laurel in the old man's crown!
cherries then we'll throw at him,
could not conceive how solemn Grimm13
by fate's decree: this freakish stranger,
worthier of you in the perfection
across the plain's enormous room,
like Regulus, that god of honour,
epoch's portrayed, survived the ban,
her look, so sweetly sorrow-laden,
foes, friends and loves, their voice is stilled.
Olinka yawned, just like her neighbour,
he'd listen to the administrator;
were chanted, I remember when --
till he at last was summoned down
whose heart experience has cooled
and trembles like a hunted fawn.
a swift, polite reply is written.
is lost in obstinate reflection;
one sees a duck and aims his gun,
Lending his tone a grave inflection,
to whisper it her inmost prayer.
a dwarf with tail, and a half-strain,
Lensky at home awaits the answer,
once more renounces world and din.
toward the neighbouring valley's river.
He asks. She can't accept. Why ever?
of lovelorn girls was nothing new?
at some dull aunt's, sat down and knew
the Corsair, or the Wandering Jew.
ancestral1 portraits met the view
XXXV
How fearful, in and out of season
from threads both sad and humoristic,
XV
V
Chapter Three
XLV
The horses, as they sense the dead,
are entered here, in friendship's gage,
IV
but in his songs kept pride of place
of their society turned her savage,
''some are far distant, some are dead''.
for wood and tallow; all the range
and finds the world a darkling show?
Gvozd&iacute;n, Buy&aacute;nov, Petushk&oacute;v
into the all&eacute;e, face to face,
we'll talk, and talk, and then we'll show
were placed across the gulf to make
Prepared for prophecy and fable,
He rings at once, and what a scurry!
blest the poor lover who reads out
my giddy mistress made me proud.
to crack between them; for a while
he's gnawed by serpent Recollection,
value the hero of my tale,
out of this world will crowd us too.
and nothing pierced his senses' blur.
use cunning silence as a screen,
the guests are feasted, good and hearty,
the hare who from afar has seen
that fiery souls' headstrong enthusing
and look serenely on your beauty!...
She struck one as the incarnation --
I might have said a word, and then
I'm altering my destination
our disposition being invented
So, like Childe Harold, glum, unpleasing,
the youthful votary of rhyme
A sledded coach, for years forsaken,
than this humiliating passion
beside his heavier half is snoring.
There was - --,10 so notorious
of sudden brightness... it's too curious...
culture, so far from healing, hurts us;
but from our friends, good Lord protect us!
great bard despite his modest trapping,
a foe - our mood should be warm-hearted.
but, when he'd rushed to Uncle's manor,
the simple faith of olden days
as if she'd been profoundly sleeping,
Alas for him! there was no keeping
such shadowy and leisured ways,
don't judge the race before it's run --
or joined us poets. His conversion
of absence on my wandering ways!
Your curiosity is burning
both dull and ludicrous, the bunded
he takes her to a chair, beginning
are here untouched by fashion's reign,
the new ballet he should be at.
has fixed; but for my heart to beat
they shove each plate, and every chair,
before the clavichord with knitted
that thievish mouths cannot consume
the moon in its azure of air.
Why is Tatyana guiltier-seeming?
drive there, and with formality
as battles go, I've not begun;
I've no one here who comprehends me,
a furious, boiling, heaving main
to give you honest explanation.
Russian pancakes were always served;
reduced to sense, not without pain --
But here, with our congratulation
and everything around was dreaming,
so all went smoothly after that.
He opens up a door. What's that
until the tombstone; there one day
and happy licence are allowed,
or, sweeter, like a butterfly
True, scorn should punish and should bridle
the carriage of the newly-wed.
it's easy, without too much fooling,
tradition still keeps my respect.
He who has lived and thought is certain
with balm of prayer my torn and rended
he struggled to bite back the chilling
and the blancmanger, then a fleet
the murmur where the streamlet played...
XXX
squeezes her hand - and brings to flower
such is the usual country cooking;
she sits with head sunk on her breast,
incendiary looks are slinking,
among the guests she recognized
we'll draw it deeper in our net;
Tatyana in a deep emotion
Neighbours in whispered tones are taking
always before the volume ended
Zhukovsky
XX
Evgeny, hating litigation,
her face would pale, she'd start to quiver.
And now, monotonously dashing
Already borne down by regret,
In swarms around Tatyana ranging,
bored by success' giddy trifle,
shocked by their modish pride, and fleeing
since, through the mist that dreams arise on,
blue smoke of chimneys goes aloft,
swaying the artless, waiting on
he saw no point in staying on,
He was sweet-natured, and yet wild.
the ancients have gone stiff and cold,
and so in winter-fields will shiver
the roundest face that you've set eyes on,
ended his wild career of fashion
his collar in its beaver braiding
led to the princess, all a-shiver,
in music's own bewitching fashion
a hermit's life - he'd be proceeding
found that in laughter yawns could stifle:
encore Mo&euml;na,7 - and rejoice
amidst the howling and the blast
still hardly opened up, from fading.''
boy-tribes with skates on loudly slice
Bacchante-like, her flighty prancing;
long life to our dear friend, Bordeaux!
beyond a doubt, its wondrous tracing
above the water started tracing
all's well; the destined hour at last
a sharp-nailed paw towards her; bracing
No madrigals were for inscribing
Guillot, behind a stump in view,
to kissing or caressing father
LX
is forced to crucify himself,
O Adrian waves, my invocation;
from the first moment it was heard
with irresistible refulgence,
Idle again by dedication,
and in flat calm I've found the stuff
as I have... learn from my belief
for quite a while by fortune's hand.
in untold beauty close at hand.
I feel a small foot in my hand;
in front of you, on every hand,
and not without a sigh, perforce
homestead, before her parents' gaze,
no noise of gaiety, no time
to heart. And in his misted gaze
long, lively tales from wonderland,
now sweet, his slumbers are distraught.
of unaffectedly fantastic
the girl he'd scorned in what he deemed
had chased me to the world above.''
a classicist, he'll not allow
Olga is there, he sees her stand
I love you (what's the use to hide
of fallen glory. Well! don't wait,
XXV
who early died as die the brave'' --
of a provincial ing&eacute;nue,
when hourly we ourselves betrayed it,
It's agony to watch the hollow
unhesitating from her tongue,
she sits down calmly on one side,
her journey home is overdue.
as did the general at her side.
an inn at each stage of the route.
over the Petersburg pav&eacute; --
on the highroad the wolves come out;
one pair! I pay them memory's tribute
(XXXVIII,2) XXXIX
Their look, though, shows no change upon it --
bigot or prude? or has he quite
with censure - I've done all to earn it!
and counsellor (retired) Fly&aacute;nov,
Dogs, howling, rushed in her direction...
here a weak version, incomplete,
with The Well-Meaner10 on her knee?
lest signs of casual weakness drew
What trifling could be more complete?
maid-servants from the whole estate
in loaded carriages, migrate,
sooner or later will relate
I introduced my saucy Muse
pours out its guiltless frank admission,
Elle &eacute;tait fille, elle &eacute;tait amoureuse.
Onegin too - and there to see,
and every night shares her repose.
to be respected all through life:
of youth, so tender, so intense?
and mileposts grip the idle sense
how to engage in talk that drew
at such vivacious, free good sense.
and dutifully shared his life
Decreed in highest court for ever...
ambassador?'' In some surprise
On whom alone can we depend?
some vote a doctor for the case,
Love passed, the Muse appeared, the weather
the tolerant Evgeny heard --
the circumstances of his capture
so it was not in any measure,
as I recall a bygone age?
What scorn I see in the expression
and just a double charge of shot
XIV
the solitude of woods and tillage,
of social buzz and modish riot,
my life in a domestic plot;
Faublas'3 disciple for an age --
will in a flash decide his lot.
I meant to paint, with Alban's8 glory,
Tatyana lowered her regard
and also prettier, I'll be bound,
or borrow, say, from me, if not.''
in everything she sees there's not
No, never in the hottest fire
and found her dreams, her secret fire,
not even in her earliest age;
by magic everything instils her
A ball: the joy of every guest!
Shall I depict with expert knowledge
LIV
''Then send your grandson with this letter
and dead ideas from that old hoard,
The censor's tribute, I'll arrange:
without a goal on which to fix,
caressing breath has fanned my face
and cared not what his daughter kept
imagination, with such reason,
Ist&oacute;mina,11 thronged all around
Onegin's soul encountered there
through baseness of the soul that he,
Was it to no effect that he,
the blood within my withered heart,
something to rack his brains about,
to Tanya, all's an empty show.
of entertaining the half-dead:
o fields - to you I'm vowed at heart.
and all the works of Fontanelle16 --
close as a shadow on the ground;
exhausted and done up, I take
I'm at your service to protect you;
for what's been given us to take;
our kin are folk whom by profession
liven the drowsing of my heart,
The happiness of youth is dead,
Ah, he had loved a love that never
but brighter than the heavenly litter,
from Million Street16 came floating round;
over his neighbour's plain memorial,
La morale est dans la nature des choses.
It's time: kind-hearted, idle creatures,
as much of banquets and the cork
inside a pocket Triquet nurses,
and force that purity inspires,
Sunk in dejection, she won't hear
as in the nook he'd sit alone
to bring across Lepage's4 mortal
she can't; Evgeny's pushed the portal,
and fastens, like a term of art,
was an enchanting country nook:
relations off, and never spoke.
Though long since Eugene's disapproval
the skyblue eyes, the flaxen tresses,
terse words or crosses in the book,
Onegin comes, and makes excuses;
and all the world is buried deep.
I'll sprinkle you with holy water,
in stars upon the river-brink.
menu, hung up for show, excites
Still blazing with resentment's fuel,
and she, submissively, inertly --
the thoughts of my two anchorites.
she peers discreetly through a chink
But dinner's served, so two by two
daytimes and evenings passed alone?
and yet a distant admonition
who else? - the hero of our novel!
I move in the grand monde? that rank,
unseen, already you were dear,
To live, it hurries, and to feel it hastes.
This dear, still world I must forswear
despite herself, rehearsed the part:
I do, I do. Well, where's he gone?''
recall, by its bewitching cup,
having decyphered on their brow
at twenty, was a fop inbred,
for Olga's beauty, Lensky gives
his conscience's record, and so
I have no leisure to recall;
she quite forgot - began to call
with a consumption, they've relied.
down to the garden, and her eyes
for angry heirs, as one, to fall
XXI
XXI
frenzy which wrecks our lives for sound,
in britzkas, kib&iacute;tkas and sleighs.
&lt; My gaze pursues them... but on station
XXXVI
the needle, never had she lingered
the Lord have mercy on us all!
Onegin has outrun us all.
XVI
XVI
But from the hero of my tale,
VI
had filled this heart, and detestation
a treasure never to be shared.
although it's nearly heard the knell,
XLVI
All in good time, on each point I
It's time she went. But what can I
no, even her eyebrow never quivered,
XLI
in secret judgement what he'd done,
people there were he glorified,
of swooning, Tanya nearly dies;
XXXII
will halt her horse and, gripping tightly
from all the world, they sat and pored
of Dian's visage, in our fancies
along Tverskaya Street already
of sense and judgement. For his part
the early pealing of the bells
XII
She sits down by the window-sill.
in solitude, as at the start
a novel on the established line
XXXVII
XXXVII
into the social whirlabout;
Beyond the stream there smoked and stirred
down to the plain in turbid rills.
threw Eugene at her feet - she stirred,
''She was the one who looked as still
is in your poetry enshrined?''
a blessing from its blasts and rages,
but in it there are certain pages
empty the purpose it proclaims,
in dream toward the woods and plains,
above the dust of his remains
you see, with tears and incantation
on the dull life that bachelors lead;
And now, my friends, I hear from you
that self-same evening where he'd go.
for 1808: his obligations
she finds, in order alphabetic:
that table where the lamp has languished,
a soul that perished long ago,
XXVIII
blooms when there's nothing else to do.
Perhaps however, to be truthful,
XXVIII
into his look, the exhibition
XVIII
XLVIII
have other maidens, since you vanished,
the strangeness of her habitation,
III
before such playfulness of soul!...
lorgnettes of jealous fashion-leaders,
I
''Just half a glass more... that will do...
had won her loyalty! What soul
he drives in brilliant sun; striated
of waiting for the dawn to blush,
its due oblivion, in the hush
the moon; but in the darkened glass
at first by Moscow's youthful graces
he'll spend before the looking-glass,
beneath it, vapour wreathed and coiled.
and logic; yet the conversation
but first, the dreams that hope can cherish
The ch&acirc;teau was of a construction
''Wait, I'll present you - but you banish
slumber still floats above his head.
Fate saved Evgeny from perdition:
into the mud, a drunken goner,
for happiness, I sought, and ranged
Lensky composed in autograph
in triumph you'll see winter through!
as gage of all things that were good,
fail to perceive - that's by the way).
he turns away: ''I've had enough --
Now that the British Muse is able
and as in some appalling dream
a shambling hoof along the way;
impatient, hatred flaming high;
the latest fashions of the town;
there's no absurdity as such,
wanders in a distracted way
but when you've managed his despatch
of Richardson and of Rousseau.
dean of Chaldea's learned team,
from German realms of mist and steam,
In French Onegin had perfected
the tongue of love and of Petrarch.
poetic in her simple pureness,
with passion and with shrewd obliqueness
in my petition an approach,
I too - when I recall Svetlana5
forgot to think of town and friends
girls' tears, their swooning, for Eugene
pretty maidens, romp away,
a Lancer - how she deified him!
darlings, then we'll run away,
and nameless rivulet, that scene
Olga's appeared upon the scene,
He roamed the world, his lyre behind him;
at heart by grim remorse's freezing.
The banquet's given no cause for sneezing,
Oak-floored, and simple as a stable:
shadows that flit behind the glazing
where (standard rhyme) are youth and fleetness?
''How long has he been on the scene?
secluded vales, where swans were crying,
Evgeny looks at Lensky, chilled
he doesn't hear when I address
soon, infidelity proved cloying,
flits Olga: ''now, tell me straight out,
her grief, and nearly ran away.
fancy, a wine serene in mood,
far-distant heaven's vaulted room;
and the deep-throated billows' choric
and although Troy's greybeards, collected
I'll catalogue each simple saying
Bubbles like Hippocrene are spraying;
Fired by the god of inspiration,
his sobs, where his live tears were flowing;
Often of course you'll have inspected
with combs, and steel utensils serving
Alas, it's not so hard to guess!
it's not in him to bring me bliss.''
by writers of her admiration,
how dull to work for the correction
that from the backdoor he'd be leaving
Bards of our tearful generation,
as bonneted Academician
The bearded outrider is sitting
can lean on faith, who can dismiss
pursuits of a monotonous breed
in others' houses she may say
works where contemporary man
''Here in the winter he'd have dinner
long since, like brother linked to brother,
the old dame wept her daughter's parting,
the man of reverie and reflection,
addressed to Onegin''... ...'Well, that's easy.
to wave farewell the household waits
Tatyana's name day celebration.
Lensky had a curt word to say
and hills that delicately winter
a house, a village, and a wood
Let's go, our friendship's worth the labour!''
Even at home his occupation
at my famed portrait and will say:
on a small table's oilcloth sheen
oh, &agrave; propos: Larin's a dear
why fight what's known to be decisive?
he consecrated to my keeping?...
for Olga, on the spreading lawn,
of life's repast betimes, nor sought
my friends, I need to pause a spell,
the altar flame's extinguished now.
VI
from daybreak valleys lift the sun;
and on her cheeks the fever stays,
of grammar, Russian language too.
with the grand general in her wake --
Sometimes his tricks would earn him trouble,
Don't let a ghost be your bear-leader,
with this the hero of my tale:
is all those stubborn lips desire!
in which our hero used to dwell.
comrades despised, and comrades rotten;
comes clearer through the mists of dawning.
is this then what you can't forgive?
and set off prompter than a whistle
adorned the sanctum of our sage.
her girlhood games; in them he'd shared,
her youth with all his repertoire
XXII
she fell in love with all the fancies
somehow have got the designation
XXII
as pair by pair the dancers fly.
the boxes; boiling, pit and stalls;
Of course. Yet fashion's wild rotation,
with shelves of books deployed for action,
need not have bristled like a beast;
just yesterday.'' ''And since your christening
XXXVII
the rogue has got a finger frozen:
The sky is clear, the earth is frozen;
all shout and argue, laugh and squeak.
in dark attire the new-born day.
fever of rhyme: thereby he's doubled
XV
the girl's pale charms, her loosened hair,
is seized by Tambov's poet-sage;
and nothing in her look is altered:
I'm grateful now with all my heart.
XVII
My mind is fuddled.'' ''Tell me, nyanya,
Two hearts there are perhaps that keep
XLVII
Who taught her an address so tender,
she trembles, and with fever drumming
VII
thumps as the balls are pressed inside
has never staked his family seat.
he's at the club, a real stayer,
already high in treason's league!
already silvering all the plain...
No feast, no welcome-gifts - with fire
XXI
with three roan horses in a line
of raging passion's surge and roll
and says: ''Farewell, you vales and fountains!
XXXIII
Zaretsky rose without discussion;
and sink to prose's humble level:
for maybe fortune will have saved
In days of carefree aspirations,
feelings he valued - from outside.
for long... for evermore. We've chased
XIII
XXXVIII
''I?'' ''Saturday. The invitation
of inexperience would have passed,
and rightly so, but now his pain
his virulence that made you smile,
to sob out prayer, complaint, confession,
But what about Eugene? With reason
from thirty down to two; and stop,
Faces before him flash and change
perhaps no more sensations lumbered
''Oh nurse, a favour, a petition...''
IV
A pause of silence and inaction,
he stood there, pensive and forgetful,
at first she had no heart to range;
was by forebodings much oppressed.
Tanya's undressed, and lies in bed.
its sails go flap-flap as it prances;
A sudden clatter!... blood was curdled...
their breed would (some years after this)
II
still captivated his young soul.
and, any moment, down he'll slip.
Once more he counts the hour-bells tolling,
Tanya's distress had risked detection
the marriage plans were all exact
to speak; believe me: of my shame
but I'm allergic to the North...1
a sham that trustful souls work out;
what occupied his chafing powers
paved roads will traverse Russia's length
rigorously though you'd inspect --
blush to descry in looking-glasses
Tatyana looks, her faintness passes:
XXIX
and stately periwigs, their fame.
at feasts, was strong and fancy-free?
add vale when he signed a letter;
or of Ist&oacute;mina, my sweet,
who, in good time, would calmly get
has left, and no one here has met her...
towards his stall, the pedlar's hawking;
the wild rose blooms, and in the covert
for, mistress-like, it's brilliant, vain,
and glad he was he'd thus arranged
galop, mazurka, waltz... Meanwhile
XXIX
each springtime, on the growing tree,
I count each hour the whole day through;
the kiss where youth and freshness gleam;
and to Tanya, when he was through,
and, in the district, this persona
hoar-frost and sun in freezing weather,
''Look to the left? where? what's the matter?''
the girl's attentive eyes are bent.
but salt; near the princess a vein
''oh, quit your stale, your tedious quacking,
yet he'd back you through thick and thin:
choked up. There's no wreath on the bough;
to be the bride I'd call my own.
and where's her sister now? and where,
and telling trochee from iambic
These days I'm finding even gladness,
through it they're known to me, and kin.
who sets me snoring then and there --
too long he's hoaxed us high and low...''
the atmosphere of youth and madness,
both set him yawning just as much.
''You don't see what to do? that's funny:
night of the second, started flaking.
I
spends light and darkness in the dreary
was the first thing that Olga said.
were all the law that I would use;
and tea and supper; there's an inner
she won't inhale the powdered rime,
or Russia's chondria, for short;
all a pure maiden's love was breathing.
Tatyana's here, you know I've brought her...''
at least by a regretful kindness;
the shepherd sings of Volga's fishing
its winds had blown him far off course.
where Tanya now confronts Eugene.
not once a day a thought will quiver,
by nature, contradiction's friend.
Buy&aacute;nov, my vivacious cousin,
''who loves you more than I, let's see
the party waits. Seized with an illness
all others with a waistcoat's set
not for the first time he succeeded
he had conveyed some moral teaching,
ladies who glide on waxed parquet.
the horses fidget worse and worse;
smoothe his way out with humour's ointment.
That's when I'll sit down to compose
at length, midst children swarming round him,
In the white heat of some dissension
LV
of light that flowering fields reflected:
which has recalled, without precision,
the valley's dark. The forest lands
to freedom, softness and enjoyment:
Chapter Two
against the tea's excessive sweetness,
But the swift summer-time proceeds --
complete with broad-brimmed bolivar,
times were when I was sharp and bold:
XXVI
But, in a fearful huff, his thrifty
those walks amid the gloom and calm
it lacked, of course, poetic heart,
packed from the maids' wing to the hall.
to mourn for Russia's gloomy savour,
devote to whist an evening party,
your advent swamps me in its flood!
and now at last he saw the World.
long since unstirred by praise and fame
pronouncing through her nose politely
death on his brow, your friend should lie,
through heaven's expanse serenely flying,
clears in a flash the freezing room;
and rest his dear bones in the tomb,
I've learnt the voice of new ambition,
amid the deadening joys of fashion,
then dress...
XXXI
far more than most who leave this life.
''Today he promised he'd be here,''
below the others who have signed
What fate is my tomorrow brewing?
his pistols, laid them in their case,
hope that he's had no time to fashion
my tongue kept drawing from the heart --
Fare thee well, and if for ever,
ensconced beside the window-pane.
rendered them tedious to each other;
so, if we want to change, we can!
of spring he lives, he's energetic;
if I had power to choose your fashion --
pure passion's flame, and in a trice
''this is the one!'' Ah, ever stronger,
By contrast, in the frozen season,
of the whole world, her nurse alone,
How often on the steep Caucasian
Chapter Four
what traps he'd set him, with what malice
she looks, the room is getting light --
as if a cold hand squeezed her heart,
Time races, and she's been forgetting
''You criticize Moscow? why make such a fuss
and the churchyard where, new-erected,
XIX
was his; we'd both drunk passion's chalice:
there was a softness in his glance:
That point I wouldn't mind contesting,
she saw no friendly figure starting
someone towards whose heart and mind
the poet's heart found full expression,
But my Eugene that night directed
takes up an hour or two; at last
poor girl, to drop into a faint,
others will follow where they tread...
Thank you for all the gifts I treasure,
in your cal&egrave;che of foreign cast --
that there his friend Kav&eacute;rin's5 waiting;
her fingers shake, she doesn't dare
would Hymen bring us - blooms that might
And then, to part us in full measure,
or, after some dull dinner's labour,
my soul in secret gave survival;
and so the harmless chat progresses
that with him to the trysting-place
that on the world's staircase there waited
for planting cabbage, like Horatius,
Friends, how my heart would leap with pleasure
He was the slave of a tenacious,
And from the nearby Army station
Manzoni and Chamfort,12 perusing
pen, tears, and rhymes, and all the rest?
to know you, swooned, and in a second
I own it: tender Parny's12 rhyme
so virtuous that, no sooner seen,
she once had pined in girlish grief,
He's off - this ruthless legislator
How well he donned new shapes and sizes --
he's viewed the boxes without passion,
Horses and coach are spliced in marriage;
the branches all are weighted down
and, in her hand, a small French book.
behind the mill. In solemn talk,
For goodness' sake, you can't be serious
I know it, in the thoughts of all
God's thunder burn you up! And when
and Lensky, left eye closing, aimed --
there Didelot10 crowned himself with glory:
''Oh nurse, I'm sad, I'm sad, I'm shaken,
And my companion, so mysterious,
after that, supper's served, and so
with years no more to meet our gaze?
the grand monde finds it out of place.
oh! her young dove, the natural hearer
her bosom heaves, her cheeks are staring
his mind's eye focused on the hinted
Vesper is met by crow of cock --
What else? Quite drunk with love's illusion,
in Russian never found expression,
I can see naught, as Hymen's foe,
XLIX
from table, clattering on the floor;
and where Thalia, gently napping,
soon a great truth came to enfold her
the season which is such a bore --
where, in a cab, and furious hurry,
cheek upon hand she softly cries
what flowers of spring display your dint?
Idol mio or Benedetta,
Iv&aacute;n Petr&oacute;vich still is dumb,
his transports, and the marriage-bed
one smoothes the pillows down in bed,
the crash of plates and knives is blended
but in an earlier age retarded,
begot by boredom out of greed.
beneath a shroud that's all dishevelled;
in bed, a young man, stiff and chilled;
and saved from being charmed or fooled!
he's host, that's obvious. Thus enlightened
and in the country, blissful, horned,
just as she'd always been, she tripped
deep in Moldavia the abhorred,
Like convicts in a dream released
hold half the world still unreleased,
forests where my young age was passed
she's their great friend, asked in, caressed,
Still on the board, the beakers hissed,
portfolios nobly illustrated
Seeing Vladimir had defected,
that visitors must be expected.
By now whist's heroes have completed
above a stream the moon had lighted.
his soul still blossomed out, and lighted
with recent fortune, vainly waited
Lensky of course was quite untainted
treaties of nations long departed,
of this our novel we reported,
jealously, shyly, I've imported
by heaven with such an unsubdued
with grave goodbyes to the bereaved,
by pain and languishment; she craved
at thirty, lucratively wed;
but at the window, in the splendid
Is he a Melmoth, a Childe Harold,
lawgiver to the modish world?
put a strong staff into my hand,
Tanya begins to understand
you see your fated tempter stand.
his choice could shock or might offend;
my father blessed me. So I'd spend
his acts and words to suit our end?
''Get up: it's gone six! I'll be bound,
gazes at all the scene around;
I'll make them spar another round,
at noontime does his horn resound
honest devotion to the good,
of leaves that autumn killed for good,
below a hill; a garden stood
perfervid language of the bard,
as at a censure that was hard.
but scarcely understood a word.
No, she's already pledged her word
as much as in Moscow the proud.
while a mazurka holds the crowd;
Deserving object: there can be
old Uncle's end was soon to be.
I'm terrified - so let it be...
she can't escape at any pace --
she speeds her footsteps to a race,
Can it be true, it won't come twice --
into the tomb's mysterious shade;
the days grew shorter, in the glade
poetry's sacred frenzy, made
they heap up silver with a spade;
perfidious blow to my inside,
tranquillity, and solitude --
or else, from far off, he could see
have each asked him to a soir&eacute;e:
just like a shadow, or a wife.
shortened, or lengthened off the page.
Evgeny's total store of knowledge
a rambling walk beside my lake,
a tempting plume for you to take?
a flimsy bridge whose every quake
the charge that poets are unable
''What of them, Tanya? I was able,
a carving-knife - and in the tangle
Let others learn from his example!
Freed from its dripping cork, the bottle
that even so my wretched style
an old man saw her as she came,
set off the ladies like a frame.
to pass the time was Eugene's theme:
the strain of Tasso's octave-rhyme!
a hybrid cross of cat and crane.
no brilliant truth, no vivid scene;
may then amuse my glad decline.
Tatyana, lonely heroine,
one raves in verse like me, and one
whisper repeated to the crone.
by blazing fireplace, and intone
when shall I start on my escape?
as love's technique, when it would blare
his French valet, Guillot, is there
of boiling youth did I desire
nothing could alter or could tire
their hands are dipped in scarlet gore,
your words, and in my soul to explore
the deeper in the wood, the more
I regularly take much pleasure
time was, in evening hours of leisure,
The place where Eugene loathed his leisure
the hall's without a living creature,
From hour to hour a surer capture
his soul to a delicious rapture
enough of my loquacious lyre:
impart such lessons as you please!
yet how I wish that I might raise
the morning after, a surprise
and magic nights. In headlong course
the entire story of your fate.
looked down in an access of hate,
to fashion's absolute dictate,
lest in forgetfulness complete
where her security's complete.
proficiency to speak and write,
to the first meanings of his flute.
you've paid insanity its due.
and stoves with tiles of various hue.
in her once more has come alive.
what can one do? as said above,
What ails him? he's in some strange daze!
parade before their mocking gaze
her eyes are lowered, but ablaze,
The ploughman there delights to doze,
upon the side of the distaff --
''Could I be happy circumscribing
a saucy kib&iacute;tka is slicing
What happened? Though his eyes were reading,
and all this flashy masquerading,
of solitude, and peace abiding!
On the seashore, with storm impending,
Her husband enters, thus concluding
or simply bow: within her being
They've missed Eugene's completed etching.
a far-flung traveller who was creaking
his life till dawn's already making,
over the business of leave-taking,
''Now march.'' And calmly, not yet seeking
But it's the talent for concealing
''I am in love,'' Tatyana's wailing
tribute of tears, applause's shrilling,
you'd made appearance in my dreaming;
have snorted, reared, and whitely foaming
meanwhile the local Cyclops, aiming
Away inside that unassuming
with love and comfort in your meaning,
the occupations of the morning.
would settle, on the morrow morning,
Or, unconsoled by the returning
There too, he honoured, hotly weeping,
the audience still is busy stamping,
and now the crunchy snow is stripping
But while she roams in thought, not caring
and though to do so would be daring,
Elated by the music's blaring,
a calculation past despising --
to meet a black monk, or if crossing
some nonsense thrown up while carousing,
in you a tender pulse was beating,
reader, we must be separating,
From violent passions fast pulsating
Hours pass; no answer; waiting, waiting.
he who has cooled down love with parting,
then in the study's quiet setting,
while serious topics were disputing,
and some were even testifying
the sober head, detesting each
with lies and jokes that packed a punch:
no vulgar epigram too much,
a madrigal for epitaph.
the driver sits and cuts a dash
but by and large their talk's a hash
his neighbour entered at a rush
God grant them years and years of health!
of neighbouring owners of the earth --
III
VIII
XLVIII
XVIII
XXIII
XXIII
II
(I, II, III, IV, V, VI,1) VII
XXVII
XXII
XXXII
XVI
In stead of happiness, say I,
says the old lady in a croak:
their journey took them a full week.
parting with Olga made him think
to gasp, and on a bench to sink.
like Delvig3 when he's dining drunk.
in morning time he'd read a book...
God grant that from this little book
at any other sort of book.
or else, my friend, how does it look?
she'd never tell them news or scandal
used in times past to ring a peal
and though he liked a fiery quarrel --
like Chatsky,5 he arrived to fall
of aunts and mothers, and the thrall
Relations. No-one else at all.
the cunning prisoner can quite well
can read enough to get my fill.
at two-ball billiards prove his skill;
darts to the boy, and looks, and still
no word came flowing from his quill;
Often she halts against her will,
oppressed by emptiness of soul,
or else lifts up a fallen shawl.
or seminarist in yellow shawl!
XL
L
(XXXIX,2) XL
arch-commentator of the dream.
all plunged his soul deep in the stream
dared clean his nails in front of him,
he's a freemason too; for him,
red wine in tumblers to the brim --
a nightingale, in forest gloom,
of tempests, in what raging ocean
when, from behind the doorway, hidden
and truffles, which have ever been
of his own room, how cruel spleen
of chalk the window-panes have taken.
she appears before him, grim and frozen.
after two minutes, off again,
levy their tribute on the plain;
advantages of heart and brain,
plunged in reflection's deepest train,
a deathless murmur from within,
of hope and gloom, romantic-fashion,
When I defected from their union
in casual letters of confession --
Vladimir's challenge found expression
one listened to a chief of mission
Evgeny, whom the repercussion
her discomposure, her confusion,
an idle monk in glum seclusion,
hell's terrifying imprecation:
etcetera. But her trepidation
She'll not see him, her obligation
Compliment and congratulation;
secure a secret assignation,
but the salon's preoccupation
A moment earlier, inspiration
with fond caress? whose adoration
Left-handed from the habitation
So to his wife for presentation
how soon the bounds of rank and station
of his intent; and a reaction
showed one a pattern of perfection
what holds her in profound reflection,
in dreams and cards and their prediction,
I know it's now in your discretion
or some vile agent of perdition
but I've not got the least intention
and all their ravishing invention
he almost begs for absolution,
to demonstrate some signs of reason:
is a compulsive bore by reason
In backwoods, how d'you pass this season?
I was Onegin's friend that season.
alone, with no adornment on;
a free romance's far horizon,
products of carefree hours, of fun,
due punishment was handed down
and at the altar, with a crown,
she did what nurse advised she do
is that my feet lack strength to go
sacred to children of Apollo!
Onegin sits at table too,
Enough, my friends; it's all so-so.
''This time I think you've been reduced to
upon her feverish tongue; the slip
delicious novels, laps them up;
Tatyana seeks to attune her ear,
but here comes our loud-talking prancer
''Could I just see the house, I wonder?''
who walks with sorrow, and with danger,
her soul's attention; just behind her
sometimes the evening brought together
Lovelace, or Grandison, or neither;
grey Filatevna, to present her
''You pile one eclogue on another!
Necker
faceted muzzles by the rammer;
Here with his wife, that bulging charmer,
it frankly, I'm a firm adorer
he'd swim this Hellespont; then later
she found Evgeny, eyes a-glitter,
And Ivan Petushk&oacute;v; no, never.
Onegin turns, and with a shiver
on Finland's coast a lonely rover --
the cabinet behind the door
''She knows you?'' ''Why, we lived next door.''
and looked for Lensky, while the labour
Onegin knew enough to savour
and by Repentance. All this lends,
she lost the language of the gods
no mansions, no ballrooms, no bards.
Lord Byron, with his shrewd caprices,
and feather-beds, and birds in cages,
parks, monasteries, towers and ledges,
damns the intruders; Tanya lies
cherries throw and raspberries
My pen, as once, no longer hurries
using overt or covert rules.
addressed to Tanya, certain verses
the inevitable silly asses,
the beauties in their flimsy dresses,
in Olga everything expresses --
this denizen of the coulisses
an album's loose and floating sheaves.
is only Olga: he relieves
while roar of violins contrives
the tears in stream pour down her cheeks.
into the tomb's wide open portals,
the tusks, the corpse's finger-nails,
and that embittered mind which boils
for us are instruments and tools;
Zar&eacute;tsky, sometime king of brawls
Russia's old glories and their gleams,
stuff of the poet's hallowed dreams!
your soul displays, in holy dreams,
for jokes, and rows, and merry dreams!
there's no ignoble tale that seems
the funeral monument explains:
as youthful sinning, or the strains
for the sublime, and for the passions
sleep runs from her, she turns and turns...
and it's the foreign phrase that trips
I'll set two ages by the ears.
printed among outmoded airs;
a Russian hammer-blow, repairs
another of the ball-dictators,
jaws masticate as minutes pass:
lions adorning gateway posts
But when a later age has found us,
and in the eyes of the judicious
your heroes, raging and ferocious,
of useful objects that the curious
attract the sneering of the jealous,
O rus!
The comrade of so many days,
another, freakish one, who stays
she'll spin this way and that, and beat
to catch the eye and to attract.
are just as nimble as their feet.
of ladies' heads, and ladies' feet;
before which life's horizon yet
all of an emptiness so killing - &gt;
Chapter Eight
or dim her, dazzle as she might.
to horror-stories told at night
My early bird! you know, last night
once more, at that beloved sight,
can it be true you must await
and with a sigh I now admit
there's a small window shining in it,
Tatyana3 was her name... I own it,
full of his usual pith and wit,
upon it, and with head down-bent
active, and hopeful, and insistent:
from their own country? Then she shot
husband and father as my lot;
fly to my corner like a dart,
with bursts of passion from the heart,
Evgeny loved him from his heart,
''Go, nurse, and leave me here apart.
it would be painful to depart
so unforgiving a report?
to each and every raving feast
she treads our earth, and how her breast
whether it goes careering past,
the hat, the scowling brow, the chest
deceived, was overjoyed to rest.
but never asked her husband first.
to pine away from passion's thirst,
by will of Zeus, the high and just,
among the neighbours round about.
We've many neighbours round about;
his dreams, while she whom they're about,
devouring Gibbon and Rousseau,
But now - oh God! - the thought of you,
''You're off? why, there's a poet for you!''
XIV
XXXIV
V
a soul that nothing can renew...
that one be shot just anyhow --
Onegin swiftly came to know
I only write like this, you know,
a cheerful glimmer on the snow
fir, forest, hedgehog, raven, snow
lived to the age of twenty-six;
(XXXVIII) XXXIX
XX
XX
XXX
XXX
Onegin, d'you recall the day
Then, plunged in the housekeeper's day,
to fresh grandparents every day.
or mother; and in all the play
to see life as a ritual play,
watch the games we maidens play.''
Tatyana's love is no by-play,
with custom, love would fade away;
looked on a river: far away
to put on chains for him, and steady
Amidst the hills, down in that valley,
''Why did you visit us, but why?
girls as they passed her spoke less loudly,
who swaggers in with the reply.
and, as the years went by, who duly
is represented rather truly,
on features known, but to that dreary,
The two old ladies kiss and cry;
in order daily, chez V&eacute;ry,1
have your fill of revelry!
of old-lime hospitality.
admires the tumult and the pressing,
And now the door is opened wide,
would on those evenings guess the fate
had ruled out reading, in their place
Moscow... how many strains are fusing
in rural calm's most secret place!
young Tanya first appeared to me,
now even Didelot's tedious stuff.''
XV
while she's from top to toe surveyed;
barrels, and then to drive aside
XL
in the deep stillness of the night,
Horace
sorceress-winter's here at last.
their joyous way across the ice;
Love's frantic torments went on beating
along the street lies dirty snow;
Mushrooms in brine, for winter eating,
mother implored me; my sad station
can it be true, their crown at last
Up to the porch our hero's driven:
and shout, and make room for the pair.
Monsieur l'Abb&eacute;, the mediocre,
has painted for us the first snow
where every day a bloodstained shade
XXXV
Smiling through sleep, nature is meeting
like foliage in the rotting fall.
his style breathed love, and not the gibing
Still as he was? has he stopped prancing?
thought, day and night, and thought again
and so your faithfullest supporter
he would have found a normal fate.
by flickering past us like a fence.
for vanity, and din, and glare!...
to know the audience hears his voice.
Vladimir shuts the book, for writing
had made his name, when, bold as bold,
Childe-Harold-like, Eugene's devoting
the horse gets wind of them and, snorting,
have you read lines of your creation
on foot, by seven o'clock, until
He drained his glass down to the end
and all is lost beyond retrieving;
So glut yourselves until you're sated
be good enough to go on reading:
as files, and scissors straight and curving,
the linen stretched on the tambour.
they all still keep their old impress:
the thought sank in, and penetrated:
and hope and passion; life had glowed
But friendship, as between our heroes,
and the majestic, antlered royal,
forehead, he strummed, his vision flitted
is death, not pain. So gently gliding
get two young friends to pick a fight,
her nerves, she leant on it her weight,
and Fly&aacute;nov, amply lubricated,
and to the vision of those mortal
across the drift-encumbered acres,
Onegin, my good friend, was littered
be doomed to feel it: there's one goal
it had its epigram-potential7...
calm men with beatific features,
XIX
But now our roads are bad, the ages
once, with its foaming and its playing,
he found too much that he regretted:
and friends and friendship, soul-destroying;
a frequent question: ''tell me who
on her smug face a flush of pleasure.
the third day, wood and hill and grazing
it stood, defiant of destruction
the utter virtue of their being,
they praise the Father of the world.
he looks, in sweet irresolution,
(vain twaddle, fables of the ages,
and more than once the German baker,
Yet Tanya's note made its impression
High rank, of course, and fashion's glasses,
neighbours in high content are wheezing;
and where the husband, recognizing
a grain of gladness; tears' repression
and take due warning from my speech.
you won't find that quite so much catch...
had with its brilliant mantle crowned --
and all the neighbours planned a match
a dumb moon, on a dumb horizon.''
I'll feed the journalists for dinner
myself and Eugene, lest a reader
Prince Vyazemsky
or else a query's wondering hook.
in father's or old uncle's book,
stare hard at her before exchanging
pale transcript of a vivid master,
of perfect bliss in you. Enough!
smile, voice and movements, little waist --
but, without asking, they transported
and arm in arm they all go through;
with neighbour Lensky, the deceased.
for the two ladies at the gates.
and sees... whatever do you think?
when, in pale sky, the stars' procession
I must wake up with the conviction
and riches, and the wish to thank
to battle further with my passion;
and then a boat, with oars a-swinging,
he eyes the door, looks slyly through.
critics and their capricious vogues,
comes for awakening, comes for slumber;
the darling objects - don't you know it? --
then from his cabinet he'll pass
Shishkov,6 forgive me: I don't know
In such an album, friends, I too
far, far from Italy, his adored.
And yet that goddess whom I'd never
''Here, near Saint Simeon; in December,
watched sun and clock - then by such labours
XXXI
XXXI
Schiller and Goethe had refined him,
daren't look behind her; fairly dashing --
after her own room, makes her fret.
and bliss for him is when he hotly
Byron
and ''what's your name?'' she asks him, speaking
XXI
XXI
now free, I once more weave together
He cursed Theocritus and Homer,
you learn life's sweetness, and with this
The fire was dying; cinders faintly
But don't be cross, my darling friend,
and charming reverie's vain deflection
the foreign words a maiden's passion
When comes my moment to untether?
Killed!... At this frightful word a-quiver,
passion's rough language talked by others,
on a fast stallion from the Don,
III
Those friends, those friends! it is, I fear,
is sad old moon's... Hark! snow is creaking...
he killed eight years in such a style,
She's in the wood, the bear still trails her.
VIII
to pass for cultured in our ranks.
VI
XXVIII
there's not a word she's understood;
La, sotto giorni nubilosi e brevi.
all brought to life at your direction.
XLI
XLI
to scorn the men with whom he deals;
over the note holds in suspension
in simple but sublime reflection,
Tatyana's haunted by her vision,
LI
the country cottages and hovels,
council, and with profound head-shaking
stands in dismay and indecision.
and in retreat from all enjoyment
XLIX
sadly he mourned for the departed.
by waters that were still and clear,
though cold I am and sad; in sleep
almanacs, journals of reflection,
The hall is full of noise and hustle,
He wakes - and who is this who writes him?
In the dark sky, a shooting star
first, we'll take vanity, and let
or quizzing-glasses of know-alls
taken your place, though not your throne?
XXIII
a corpse on boards was all he found,
behind deceit or double-dealing?)
XXXIII
but whispers, the guffaw of fools...''
the talk of guests when they appear;
that rogue, backbiter, pantaloon,
drive on! And now we see a-shimmer
XVII
could it be she, who just had turned
on her conquest, we leave my sweet;
But not today. Although I dearly
the hunter in the wood will swear
at first Madame gave him tuition,
and introduced, for the last lap,
''Well, what?'' the neighbour says, ''he's killed.''
foretells for her some wondrous role;
is it that she, poor simple sweet,
The darkness thins away; but still
he's first to toast her in the bowl,
glitters with hoar-frost all about.
finds her alone, and there they sit
and sat down by the window-sill.''
From that rough spell at last exempted,
a marksman crouching in the green.
or letters in a young girl's hand.
who was it that you dreamt about?''
once more the love, once more the smart...
sets a sonorous cadence rolling --
cold reason, sleep in sensual welter
''How did you come to marry, nyanya?''
suspecting wonders would come out.
At last he wakes, and stirs in bed,
the jug of bilberry wine is seen.1
spirit that anguish had made ill.
Her frightened cry brought running out
With womankind, the less we love them,
word on his lips, and thought: it's sheer
always comes back: I'll not be wedded.
heaven's will - for you I'm set apart;
All flourishing; they send their duty.
he stalked the drawing-rooms, remote
in deepest thought at the chess-board
harboured by maidens of thirteen!
and then it's tea that comes to mention,
for unmeant kindness - how he shone!
a fisher's fire. Through country gleaming
amazement: ''Where's your second gone?''
and been as happy... as I could!
''Princess, mon ange!'' ''Pachette!'' ''Alina!''
to rains, and flax, and the stockyard.''
with deeds; that dunces now and then
they needed kvas like air; at table
inside the Larins' house fell mute.
what it's transported to our shore
sang for the guests above the wine;
two cupboards, one divan, a table,
I thank him without reservation,
to talk of this and that, but then
quickly to O... I mean to that...
What power enslaves you, with your seeming
the poet struck down by his friend!
to wreck a maiden's sleep with fable,
and tedious means to festive ends.
the headpiece-text is thus indited --
the leather rein, to learn the tale,
IX
and where is love's tempestuous yearning,
But onward, onward with my story!
by way of secret tome that slept
that your proud glance is sure to take!
to his mysterious tree the snake
of whispering woods where my Eugene,
was quite beyond his wit, we found.
and in her grief seemed fit to die;
and Lensky follows her... Eugene,
recalling earlier time's romances,
Goodbye, for now we make an end.
is dear to me, for it has brought
IV
relined and strengthened for the drive;
his converse gave Onegin pleasure;
she blossomed in the graceful ways
where the prize-boy of fashion's college
a spirit strange, a spirit burning,
unloved, and friendless, and estranged.
the moderns rage against the old.
their masters' berries undetected
there was no trace to be detected
like fields in spring when storms arrive.
and looked at him without a word,
At last, with dawn upon him, stooping
''I close. I dread to read this page...
her husband's or the world's attention...
he sang of lifetime's yellowed page --
His father died; and (as expected)
beside the window-sill, that bed
you're all in fever... heavens above.''
with all our hearts, and who require
No, incorrect and careless chatter,
would have been all that we required!
Capricious belles of grand Society!
our modern Russia's plague and bane.
XXIV
Already Olga's hand was gripping
the full fruit of her heart's desire;
XXIV
that inexperience leads to grief.''
no move she makes, no breath she draws;
had long proved tedious to distraction:
of goblets, tall and slender pretties;
yourself too long from social life.''
sets out upon her homeward course;
they shared their days in deed and heart,
his sweetheart faithful to her grief.
around Priam the much-respected,
and now a swooning mind attends me,
in albums, blunted the censorious
Friends, all this meant was: I've a date
by Naiads, one foot on the ground,
what's more, I loved you; but my hunger,
the wilful fancies of the heart.
Heedless of the proud world's enjoyment,
The old dame had no thought of scouring
where scribbling friends have interjected
and eatables beyond all classing
others prescribe a watering-place.
It's right and proper that you went.''
but will, and reason's strong constraint,
when suddenly I saw this treasure
sometimes, in reverie's sacred land,
unconsciously he let it mount
thank you for sorrow and for pleasure,
Down there, by slow degrees, the stream
and give her comfort to the end:
Reflection was her friend and pleasure
and, curious now about the lot,
Days when I came to flower serenely
''Abandon hope for evermore.''9
then he began to talk once more
our lives were flat, and what had fired
the heavenly lights in glorious quire
by decent company, has not,
but looks and talk took the direction,
poetic dreams, a brighter fire.
of the Terpsichorean foot.
of sighs, and compliments, and fire;
between two aunts, in pillared shelter,
the faces met with everywhere;
yet floods of talk around the town...
Madame de Sta&euml;l, Bichat,13 Tissot,14
XXIX
from whom he'd kept a letter, where
When progress and amelioration
her drops of tears, and seated there,
beneath the stone reposes here,
in country towns and suchlike places
folly for me to interfere
Tatyana simply lay in bed,
he leaves a tender verse behind,
for men to see, still in the scope
but now I've rather lost the art.
L
sharpness of wit, and social art,
in showing how to tell apart
with work at home; but when he'd gone,
a slipper, or a magazine?
IX
still meek, still deaf as howd'youdo,
of jealousy has made her start,
Vladimir Lensky. Quick, let's dine!
where are distress, commiseration?
at least her tone is sometimes found
and plaits a piebald shoe of bast;
lively, capricious, and inane...
of mind got clarity new-found;
reader, you ask, and I'll expound --
She folds the page, lays down the plume.,
fortune, and dignity, and glory,
''Enough, stand up. It's now for me
Tatyana's rites are not for me.
the coach has reached its destination;
him prove it, writing after me.''
with Guillot; while pourparlers last
yet he fell out of love at last
of its unvarnished monochrome.
about what's buried in the past:
he leaves one morning the hermetic
on Richardson gone raving mad.
bidding us to reject for good
startling the ingenuous with a jest,
the whole thieves' kitchen flies asunder,
''To me, Onegin, all this glory
I put your genius to the test,
you'd not so much as know the name,
and theirs was the poetic flame
unnoticed, in unseeing style,
by the new whisper in the wood?
his parents' patriarchal dust
but Olga would have never read!
Evgeny read the sad epistle
of love so timorous and gentle.
times were, when master's least suggestion...''
a country house - and one who still
But now Vladimir's doubts are still:
early tomorrow at the mill
already tends too much to smile
the source's chattering voice is heard;
The protocol is all one wishes:
Tanya today goes hurrying out
not even by chance, once in a while,
his epigrams topped up with bile.
spectacled age divines as well,
a steed responsive to the bridle,
humbly I heard your lesson out?
She entered the deserted yard.
Now nearer... hooves... and in the yard
as fast as post-horses could go,
or cause the bursting of his bubble,
and breeding ducks and geese as well,
Porcelain and bronzes on the table,
the iron figure3 on the table,
the ballroom drove me off my head:
This wearisome perambulation
and walk, and breathe, before I tell
her feelings were far more inclined --
bear's gone; a hallway, no mistake;
that soul without a moral tie,
no, quite naively I'll retell
bed-time, and time for guests to go.
all in a blaze, I said: it's he!
nothing more lovable than he.
but then she found their choice was strange.
across the Baltic in exchange
IV
(the reader thinks the rhyme is lilies:
the Major's here: he's all the rage
Lel6 floats about above her head;
in a still stream that never dries.
I really dote upon the word:
her manner is no less contained;
a hideous deal of tribulation.
The world of fashion, prone to flatter,
had nothing to employ his life.
XXIV
Melpomene wails long and loud,
XXXIV
are old times, and the servants' hall.
neighbour was sure, from this would flow
that generations of new beauties,
a restless urge for change of place
becomes a horse for all to see;
''The house, the park... I'll go and see!''
V
to us, though, not exactly new.
Friend of my heart, be at my side,
to help her from the other side;
&lt; amongst the soulless men of pride,
ranges, Lenora2-like, she'd ride
see with their jugs the milk-girls go
XXV
for him a lofty stair. His shade,
XXV
would launch into self-sacrifice;
he'd pop the poison in his chalice!
Without romance, or false insistence,
conversing in a singsong voice;
raised a dull eye to moon's refulgence,
Spoilt by the habit of indulgence,
a stall, a kitchen and a fence.
it brought back Tanya from her trance.
it mastered him in slow gradation;
He lacked the slightest predilection
expose his soul to an intrusion
dear Tanya, lover of illusion;
then from the Muse there came revival:
Triquet, ingenious poet, dares
I find myself no longer equal;
such careless language of surrender?
and plunged in tender shame's confusion,
glitter and tumble as they go,
and yet in vain ennui I squander
the cooks prepare the midday meal;
amateur of caprice and quirk.
The flirt has reason's cool volition;
with a Venetian maiden who
Tatyana, sleepless in the dark,
''You know him, do you?'' ''Yes and no.''
grey-haired and weak, beneath it only
Bard13 of The Feasts, and heart's depression,
Along the fronts of darkened houses,
what is he? Just an apparition,
and finally be turned to rock
in taffeta of mourning black.
Onegin still is slumbering deeply.
all day, all night, his presence fills her,
and, scroll in hand, before her eyes
and Dunya works the samovar;
when our Zaretsky met his eyes.
I've learnt new sadness; but in this
XXXVI
but just then Eugene's pistol flamed...
XVI
unanimous exchange of looks
XLI
XXXII
XXXII
but your vile Helen's not my star --
do with her when a flat reply
XXII
XII
How dull are acting and evasion,
the lover of Julie Wolmar,3
like irksome phantoms, null as zero.
had been for ever borne off far
sledges, and tardy dawns together
(XV, XVI,2) XVII
the samovar of evening boiled,
sometimes he'd fall into a trap
sharing her in promiscuous fashion,
VII
The lady of the house has fled.
''Ah, Tanya, come to me, it seems
had gone in no uncertain fashion
II
XLII
''So let it be! for you to keep
XLII
LII
farewell you too, familiar mountains!
All Lensky's thoughts went hurly-burly,
Alone amid all his possessions,
villages flickered far and near,
land where I learned to love and weep,
No secret crimes, and no perditions,
When we've retreated to the banner
he's seen it all; with looks and fashion
a tear for him... but what's to weep?
XVIII
song, laughter, whistle, bark and champ,
the impatient conqueror was humbled!
from drowning's death in Lethe river
but hold my tongue, lest it appears
and than these letters, and these tears.
here's Petushk&oacute;v, the local fop;
with a small tray and a teacup.
III
yet people's malice and suspicion
II
so Lensky answered the old dear:
the morning light no longer lingers,
on unknown ladies in the tiers;
Then doors are opened, Lensky enters,
the abstracted poet would bring forth
bringing her unity and strength;
Perhaps, when thoughts are all a-quiver
He was a good and simple barin;6
Italian nights, when I'll drink in
throughout the boredom of the hours --
he loves you... like your kith and kin!
I've drawn a plan and a projection,
Meanwhile Onegin starts to languish:
before my gaze began to pass.
how pleasantly the stages pass.
with a first click, the catch is tried.
Poor Tanya's bloom begins to languish,
swapped it for odd tomes of Malvina,
the meaning of an epigraph,
and friend Evgeny. The princess
it hurts, he laughs, and all in vain
Like modish rhymes that lack all reason,
the crush, the glitter and the gladness,
Christmas came on. What joy, what gladness!
He smiled as Lensky talked: the heady
the earth for him grew dumb and closed?...
the Russian N, like N in French;
now pay attention, I beseech,
human reaction, every speech
the modesty of her condition,
of time between the wolf and dog.)
round the dim river sleep; the curtain
and radiate a rainbow: blazing
that modish rings were still a-buying.
I would have found a friend, another,
to lift her skirt up; still she's flying,
the answer's past all human viewing,
invention sparkled, then gave way
now golden autumn's just arriving.
in silence all day she'd remain
The tomcat, mannered and affected,
don't waste your efforts on the air.
Strike the ditty up, my sweets,
Onegin spoke about its flights
Moscow's the place, the marriage-fair!
the gallery claps - it's bored with waiting --
fate could be something else again..,
would not have recognized again
and thus our race, so fluctuating,
''By virtue of procrastinating
If suddenly aloft she spied
not the plain, timorous, dejected
to Eugene; nineteen to the dozen,
''A place where you'll find none of us.''
the untiring city, where you've given
even the scandal's not amusing;
To be a butt for the malicious
appears offensive or amusing
with care Zaretsky stows away
her little friends, Tatyana'd yawn,
Some neighbours there have come together;
Buy&aacute;nov whirls off Pustyakova;
Hussars on leave are racing hither
my task, so vivid and so serious
undressed, by candlelight selected
scarlet with passion's instant flaring,
her head in modesty cast down,
by fresh ennui as he reflected
Lensky, that tragic victim, died...
nor from the bath-house roof be clearing
fixing an early rendezvous
midst crones with endless tears to shed,
before you on the ground, unhearing,
Today a mental fog enwraps us,
Whenever nyanya had collected
He finds the shock beyond all bearing:
Tatyana on; Miss Kharlikova,
till now our language - proud, God knows --
ignores approval's friendly clapping,
Or, in your lonely homestead, moping,
forgotten features. ''Can you say,
inherited from earlier days
and in my soul, o spring, how madly
by Baratynsky's3 wondrous pen,
outside, the scarlet rays of dawning
by deep and shady woods protected;
November stood outside the door.
all stand. He walks towards the door.
Meanwhile another new landowner
but I perhaps will be declining
with tufts of snow; and through the lifted
e sempre bene, gentlemen.
the boring wives, the ill-bred men,
he should have settled for disarming
of innocence: a lily blooming
It baffles me. But I'll repeat
awaits him - hears nobody coming.
and every plea that lips can treat;
The World found this enough to treat
Eugene had no wish to betray
He lay quite still, and strange as dreaming
killing each evening off like that?''
Moments of silence, quite unbroken;
alarmed by my melodious lay,
by clearing every sort of debt;
but held up by the simple fact
No, early on his heart was cooling
for his old courses to be changed.
and there at large he goes patrolling
before it was the golden play
who'd sit, and at the end of play
how long is it?'' ''And since I fed
for the footlights, this fickle traitor
not only pain, too much to meet...
simple old lady; but the liquor --
the nightly luminaries climb.
as if beneath her, dark and rumbling,
then liking grew, then every day
to the hero that she'd adopted.
he was a poet in his day.
bring up a table, and a taper;
She looks: forgotten past all chalking
of secrets, like a friend but dearer,
Now for the first time she's escorted
at once they give a man the spleen.
he read, and read - no satisfaction:
that queen of secrets and of sighing.
Yet the mazurka keeps today
Eugene, with solemn face, paid heed,
his foolish face; more pleasant yet
I'm sick, my dear, I'm sick indeed.
shine out and bring the world to bliss. &gt;2
I buttonhole a wandering neighbour
all for our tender dreamy maiden
Each one by now is badly needing
Dressed like - --,14 duly dreading
in the mazurka he was light,
Her father, kindly, well-regarded,
He sweetened up with fancy's icing
The nervous-tragical reaction,
last many a day, and many a night!
just as the Poet15 paints himself.
a stride on Petrarch's path, allayed
once more he can't await the night;
and took two Petriads in calf,
at Cleopatra, hiss her off,
''Gladly.'' ''So when?'' ''Why not tonight?
And now the two opponents doff
brooding that is the lover's ploy.
sleep much, read little, and put down
down in our damp earth-mother's womb!''
of Morpheus had induced relief
saw through the window, morning-bright,
more and more brightly still they blaze.
untirable, at sound of drum:
''But I was simply not intended
clock in the country rings the hour;
''There, just in front of all that swarm,
until this day, a lady's love
to garden walks, as arm in arm
in ink with colour-wash above;
not cold, but also not effusive,
enticing nets to do them harm.
to drain its beaker down, nor thought
if not slow-witted, might have known.
Agree, the way Eugene proceeded
''Then, in the backwoods, far from rumour
Now, to my cost it may be true
XX
your early life, unlock your tongue:
our vessel's long been overdue.
what kind of thought, what observation,
him far enough through wild and waste.
O Russia!
a humble cross, in woodland gloom,
with any torture so exquisite
I have to drag my feet to it.
coated with a thin layer of spite.
the murmuring Nereids recite,
drew scrutiny no less complete --
of evening, and those tears, the balm
and redcurrants throw at him.
''But so it is: I'm in no state
Revenge's hour is near, and after
X
flown from society as we know it,
darkly above the water's lilt,
from cruel fortune such a fate?
fresh leaves... for such is heaven's mandate.
what London calls, with humble duty
and fatherland and grim confinement?
the coachmen ring the fire, and curse
The rustic sage, in that apartment,
(IX,2) X
''Command me, darling, as you choose.''
was his absorption in their sense.
the fear and rage with which I foam!
beyond a string of dull tableaux,
military-foppish, diplomatic --
he has to bring the battle-case.
take any novel, clearly traced
there, where the coulisse entrance went,
and good and ill, and learning's fruit,
the prince bring up his own relation
and everything is cramped and loud;
how sad the scar of passion's knife:
girl reapers as the streamlet flows
Walking? The country that you roam
explodes; wine fizzes up... but stay:
Is Others' View,5 that clever lyric,
''Who would have thought it?'' ''What an age!''
or novelties from fashion's page.
Martin Zad&eacute;ka was the siren,
from off her charming shoulder's drooping,
to meet the unhappy poet, skipped
Parisian taste invents for one --
on state affairs; there was a wit,
still coughing, hissing, clapping, champing;
hunts cheeky flies, with swatter sweeping,
and those we sing for will be paid
with scorn to make my world a hell.
whether from heaven or from hell,
By chance those verses haven't vanished;
with lines to mark where they were sleeping...
for which of them the tomb was yawning,
and on her lips a light smile plays.
as was the old suspicious sage,
But she refuses to perceive him,
Onegin's waiting on the ground.''
where he was master of his college,
are we recalled to grief still burning
''Can it be she?'' Eugene in wonder
what moves along the hidden ways
and when, by misty moon, the east
or something tenderer still, for you.
with pots and basins out of mind,
that languid beauty, listens nicely --
for dance, and din, and worldly ways,
in quilted dressing-gown adorned,
the logs; the wild ones have the floor;
for God's sake, that will do. But, brother,
her darling foot of its wet shoe,
in which his hero's mould was cast.
you gave me such a shocking fright!
the big room, further, not a cat.
years back, to call up many a fable;
In this, dear reader, if you know it,
I must translate - there's no presuming --
looks at him with a steady gaze,
Semy&oacute;n Petr&oacute;vich, mean and glum,
Yes, spleen was waiting like a sentry,
''Goodbye, Onegin, time I went.''
a different mask? is he becoming
It's time to drop astern the shape
one thing inspired his breath, his heart,
Sometimes a landscape's represented,
and in the bath-house had a table
She looked across, felt in her heart
Shy as a savage, silent, tearful,
XIX
the heart and all its fragile dreams.
spoke words of hope? But who are you:
O, never know these frightful dreams,
he hears a voice; ''well, what? he's killed!''
Tatyana breathed on the cold pane,
that huge ballrooms vibrated under,
cooked-up where garret-vermin babble,
have pushed their frontiers further out,
But now they're near. Already gleaming
Give me a pen and give me paper,
XVII
feeling is quaint, and fit for fools.
XLII
of Bogdan&oacute;vich's11 refrains.
she grew accustomed, and contented.
to spoil loose paper by the ream;
her out-of-fashion clothes!... oh, mercies!
to pranks and jokes of earlier date.
instead the chance to get acquainted
All this has now gone out of fashion,
your icy look, your stern dissuasion,
But was it happy, his employment,
passion and dreams of pensive cast.
it led him, in these early sessions,
XXXIII
the legatee of his relations --
XXXIII
&lt; XXXVII7
Perhaps to improve the world's condition,
and hetman of the gambling-halls,
of sleeplessness, faint inspirations,
XXIII
How early on he learnt to trouble
my soul had heard your voice ring clear,
had once before, across the scene
XXX
in empty deeds and futile toils.
even to count them throws me out.''
he fled from their resounding chatter!
LI
bassoons and flutes begin to trip.
VI
the man who laid her brother low.
like native idiom from their lips?
is with dull trash that can't cohere:
and so he lacks the strength to mention
then to the altar, to be crowned.
frost gleams. We watch with gleeful thanks
XXVI
against each other swift, small feet.
the glare, the fumes in which I live,
XLIII
and on the flames let fall unseen
XLIII
LIII
III
the vales dry out, grow brightly printed;
XXVI
rushed to Anisia's room, to plunder
calls out his name... All unavailing:
''My dearest heart, you're sick and ailing.''
there any friend of harmless pleasure
(VIII,2 IX,) X
that ardent youth entirely lacks;
don't let me stray in paths unplanned.''
I
No, soon she changed her old demeanour:
with sheer enchantment fills her cup!
Bokharans, orchards, merchants, shacks,
to high renown my doleful story,
But you, grand tomes I loathe with passion,
their hand to grapple slander's cup,
Pikht&iacute;n, of the Hussars, was here;
and portents of the lunar phase.
neighbours and friends in kindly group,
Present me, please.'' ''You're joking.'' ''Never.''
but in the old days she had heard
XI
his illness lends him courage and
pouted, and swore in furious passion
of kindling smiles in ladies' eyes.
to burn - and then by force of reason
XXI
I
with young Semy&oacute;nova,9 and there
fat P&uacute;styakov has driven in;
But God, how deadly dull to sample
would have divined the tender, shrinking
such stubborn brain, and vivid will,
youth's choice, the flower of French cuisine:
with the resounding chime of glass.
Tatyana, hunted by love's anguish,
that fills him and in which he lives.
and should have played a different part:
to Evgeny. Oh, God, she'd never...
it was goodbye, Monsieur l'Abb&eacute;.
though he's unknown, there's no suggestion
come to the fields, my friends! To horse!
and glumly serves the medicine bottle,
of the most harmless, hopeless trash.
After a fine career, his father
it was quite torn in half and breaking.
the foes, cold-blooded and unspeaking,
Lensky's thrown down. The murk is thick
and ran far off... the Muse came too.
he'd drink his coffee, flutter through
arrested by the sheer perfection
Well, I must make a frank confession,
''I weep... In case there still should linger
and p&acirc;t&eacute;, Strasbourg's deathless glory,
he failed to join that sharp profession
Farewell the games of golden childhood!
the swarm, the glittering mob that presses,
Martin Zad&eacute;ka fails to mend;
And just here, in the window-nook,
The jealous poet's gloom is lightened!
Tanya's no longer quite so frightened
spelt hazard, ruin and disaster;
with foppery and too much starch,
No one's, I swear by God! in sadness
and once again received a crown.
that's the morass, I beg you note,
But she who modelled for the sketching
this soul that glowed with virgin fire.
still as a shadow, grim and bitter;
outside the house. But you'll be aching
is in voluptuous languor dressed,
Nursed in the orient's languid weakness,
straightened his wig, and asked her name.
her hands affectionately pressed;
while in the hut a girl is singing;
you called there twice, and since then took
for heart's delight, or fun, you took,
let no more such digressions lurk
and evening now drew on in mist...
a ball here, there a children's party;
my hours in fear and bitter crying.
at a friend's word, a girl's caress.
have drenched the steel bit as they go
Poets, I'll say in this connection,
new depths of boredom.'' ''No, the same.
In fact one day a note came flying
dead ash sets no more sparks a-flying;
that alien scene must I now turn
where folded arms are tightly pressed.
On the first sheet you'll find a question:
his thoughts were on a distant goal:
Europe's most finely chiselled wares
He followed them without illusion,
and from within come noise and cheer;
eight rubbers; and by now eight times
self-willed it may be just the same;
her heart had long been overrun:
his soul with murmurs of distress.
(like passion's dream, that other revel)
of the cotillion's endless theme
then, country evening fast arriving,
She dropped... ''It's he! Eugene arriving!
and health, life's sweetness and its shimmer,
the horns, and the moustachio'd nozzles --
They sing; unmoved by their sweet-sounding
the charm of what was grave and plain.
and looks out on the darkened plain.
She enjoys the stately orchestration
at last alone, and quite forgetting
walked homeward round the kitchen garden;
Onegin - now once more my theme --
despite herself, is Lensky's doom;
direct from shipboard into ball.
that, though polite, was clear as ice.
each in tumultuous turn descending
Conjecture found unending matter:
and no one in the room so proudly
Where to, God knows. The trail is dead.
quite self-absorbed and unaffected
since I stopped sinning years ago.
from gaol to greenwood, by such fiction
XXXV
with gown and slippers; tearing hurry,
For cousins from afar, on meeting
which held him silently subjected,
just now of wrestling with his shade,
but from her shaggy-liveried ranger
the brilliant crackpot: this reaction
grew hardened to life's frosty clime;
Who'll sow no calumnies around us?
Tatyana went with them, and sped
as if some goal had been achieved.
XXV
and heartless pleasure was up-graded;
with mournful sound the secret shade
of husband's friendship - worst of all!
she's nearly swooned, she's suffocating;
She's dressed since dawn, dead pale; debating,
And Eugene? half-awake, half-drowsing,
her path a hare in headlong flight
or if himself, with rage arousing,
regard, and slipped away for good, ...
Yet hissing froth deals a malicious,
the trail the youthful poet followed
let's go where, winding all the time
V
but ladies' hands are not for kissing;
themes popular or idealistic,
and in his look there shows somehow
set to well-known children's glee:
to drain, on credit, bottles three.
your tears would flow - but your emotion,
your battles, lawless and atrocious,
till Moscow, meekly on its knees,
your matchlessness, to seek to capture
its furrow through the powdery icing;
in all its mystery. Hymen's teasing,
by moonlight two young girls took pleasure,
yet dared not trust what I could see.
X
to hide a hope, to make a show
Of course, the love of tender beauties,
No look, no word for him: she's chosen
in Adam Smith was his diploma;
had fortune blest me by prescribing
O Brenta, I'll see you in dream;
it's my profession; he was wearing --
on most occasions between friends,
could they not give each other quarter
for the bleak tongue of boorish clods --
sing God knows whom, compose with art
his heart was plunged! A sudden sound,
with sabre's slash, and bullet's blast.
Lost in our backwoods habitation
of a delicious, guiltless dream...
But ever stranger and more fearful:
and hate with malice; he whose life
But then, oblivious of the city,
Our evanescent northern summer
it's like a vanishing newcomer --
Whatever in this rough confection
Please follow me. And here's the inner
with such a blissful, brief infection --
I feel a brotherly affection,
It's true, the magnet-like attraction
Tatyana listened with vexation
What do I want? what am I after,
''The one you love's the younger daughter?''
on words of foreign derivation,
and in the misted condensation
like a drunk traveller in a shelter,
where dwelt this child of inspiration,
then he'd implore a declaration,
And home was now their destination;
Sign of the urge for domination:
alone, and sunk in calculation,
at verse, and hiss an imprecation,
Her loving spouse with approbation
before she goes, she seeks permission
But go he won't: for him, a letter
I make magnanimous confession,
three carts - traditional procession --
importune with my lyre, whenever
your chorus, is it dead for ever?
Enchanted land! There like a lampion
Already, in exultant fashion,
But, now I've praised the queens of fashion,
that fell, and then began to shiver,
I'm yours, in a predestined fashion,
leads Olga and Tatyana on
so often from her Moscow cousin
They take her too to the Assembly.
Tatyana's Letter to Onegin
and parts the fringes of his curtain;
No sleep, beneath that silken curtain,
days that are lost behind the curtain,
to your loved ones? They do maintain
of virgin fancy, and again
What if your pistol-shot has smitten
in, past concierge, up marble stair
Our love is what they most abhor;
take wing on spite; that serious men
In passion's sluicing rain they freshen,
Vladimir Lensky, whose creator
in corners whispering girls concur;
touches her hand, or throws a fur
however strongly she has been
locked himself up inside his den
by way of toast to their fair neighbour;
without surprise or rage... his laden,
between their girls and this half-Russian.
and feel once more emotion's ban.
Exhausted by the ballroom's clamour,
the easier they become to charm,
that lady whose engaging charm
Prince N. respectfully invites him
My uncle - high ideals inspire him;
how they remind me of your stem,
a grizzled Calmuck stands to meet them,
on this unstable life, my friends!
I prize the attention of my friends,
covered the golden coal - the steam
another, a more chilling dream,
away, so cool, so unconcerned?
I liked his quality, the dream
in midst of a poetic dream,
impatiently on the mill-dam,
at sunken wax inside a bowl:
in vain on my unworthy soul?
is known today; only a soul
with sighs unconsciously regretful.
a red-foot goose, weight something fearful,
There's powdery snow up to her knees;
I drop my hero... I'll be truthful:
The years would pass; no longer youthful,
Love tyrannises all the ages;
graduates of the Levshin1 school,
Public opinion - here's our idol,
to the complacent and the null;
then he presents her with the scroll.
A new acquaintance claims our quill.
as Sadi17 sang in earlier ages,
he reached the stream below the hill;
Still for ever, fare thee well.
at any hour escape his cell.''
plagued by her ghastly dream, and tries
by any itch for marriage ties;
Tatyana asked. The children all
brushes on thirty different scales;
She's here, she spreads abroad; she stipples
thickly the exclamations fly.
''it's time!'' and freedom hears my hail.
he whirls her through the wood... a hovel
for whom, to expiate your crimes,
No hope! no hope! He leaves the revel,
or cunningly create a quarrel,
But let's return to our essential,
twirls the other slowly as she pleases,
But I myself read my bedizened
a mild rebuke was his worst mark,
makes to her nurse low-voiced remark:
blessed are daytime's care and cark,
coldness of wit; each note he took,
where flows a little glittering brook,
and to that far and lonely nook
round Tanya congregate the misses,
fruits of my labour and my ink...
even without me it will sink;
and bred upon the Neva's brink,
Ladies of such a cast, I think,
their guests, for all they ate and drank,
to kiss Armida's lips, or seek
does he still pose, and play the freak?
is agony, if I may speak,
XXXI
XI
frontwise and back, that way and this.
XI
XXXVI
XXVI
VI
and thought, a sleepy numbness steals;
Onegin's Letter to Tatyana
hymnal as, endlessly unfurled,
XXII
XII
XXVII
down from his Kalmuck steed he rolled
XXVII
in limpid verse that lives and gleams.
though I'll come back to him, yet clearly
VII
(XXXIX, XL, XLI,) XLII
no trace of ink, no spots, no stains.
XXXVIII
with a quick look perusing lightly
an ode in twenty-five cantos.
XVIII
beds, bridges, lawn, she never stops,
XLIII
II
am I estranged, does all that cheers,
a raging torrent, capped with breakers,
He'd given up girls - now gave up letters,
an eloquence of fevered strength,
monsters the maiden stood revealed.
and he pursuing, till at length
fieldwork directed from the path,
towards the simple urn beneath;
defeated, turned up at his neighbour's.
fades from the view, and in the hush
still dim, through crystal's magic glass,
her thoughts away, knew how to lavish
a shadow, null and meaningless,
allows no comfort to come through --
feeling to what had long been heartless:
summons his people. On the sleigh
once I too liked it very much;
the flickering tones of dress and speech,
so long as they're employed in song:
hope sting it, then we'll try deploying
So went his sermon. Almost dying,
and tell of children's plighted playing
and racking with their strain and stress
accounts were done, a winter outing
Just facing Tanya's where they're sitting;
the album of a country miss
sets the wise traveller cavorting
giddy as Venus when she's mounting
friends, foes, priests, guests, inured attendants
the infant year with cheerful greeting:
about one thing, till our next meeting.
in that one sound, for Russian hearts!
of the old Tatyana. Eugene tried
He's flown to Talon's,4 calculating
by dull eternity's purlieus,
Take Olga's shoulders now - the beauty!
he's dreadfully dissatisfied;
gripped him no more; soon they were raising
over the slush, where is he chasing?
some splendid lady is referring
that she's ''ideal'', begins preparing
eyes rolling, arms uplifted, furious,
the urn of perfumed tea, and tipping
his weary head, and softly drooping
as the perfection of our days!
no vision of her fields is dawning.
you drink the magic draught of yearning,
But finally she heaved a yearning
they're on the dance-floor, waltzing, spinning.
adorning all its country ways.
His visitor from the beginning
and by the sound of silly joys.
(critical judges, strict as any)
perpetually, one goal for dreaming,
silver with moonlight, in her dreaming
believes in her elected dreaming
the neighbour... you must tell the brat
it held me captive; tit for tat,
Who's not disgusted by cajoling,
on me, all this has no effect:
amongst devout coquettes, appalling
is calling us, for ever calling --
that somehow that same day we'll meet...
and kisses smack as young girls greet;
still made of tulle, the self-same bonnet
no magic fancies of the poet,
Not so? ''No, sirs, the ode's the thing,
inspires your lute to sounds of sighing?
and then concludes: she loves him yet!
in the expression of its being,
(that half-pay archivist); and bounding
on Christmas Eve, he wished me joy:
They're settled in; and crawling, sliding,
for shame and fear my wits are sliding...
bathed in the moon's inspiring light.
In second place the poet might
their cloaks; Zaretsky's measured off
found for its utterance that night.
each moral puts us in a doze,
down slopes of mountains, when a blaze
penates, came to cast an eye
may chorus, when she comes in sight,
recalling earlier loves, did we,
''Nurse, I'm not ill; I... I'm in love.''
he found Tatyana so attractive,
A man who's active and incisive
and with a halting, trembling gait
there'll be a fight. For that I give
am always glad to write, it's true,
You too, mamas, I pray attend it,
and set on hating the coquette,
some minutes long. The words won't fit
from Boston's cloth or gossip's quote;
you're sure to find her portrait in it:
Enough I've wandered in the suite
and put them on a paced-out site.
My heart awaits you: you can turn it
a nation's wealth is, what augments it,
''I don't see what's so bad about it.''
for swapping bullets with my mate.
is tinsel on a life I hate;
where admonitions are pronounced,
the pillars of the turnpike-gate;
and I surrender to my fate.''
a simple monument is built.
prepares himself; and then his verse,
of oligarchical converse,
and gave our heroine enjoyment
purport of other lines; intense
no matter: hope, in child's disguise,
Worse luck, Larina crawled; the employment
He was convinced, a kindred creature
And so, at last, feature by feature,
she calls down curses on their leisure,
their table, and their hours of leisure?
and I be by the world forgot;
but Tanya found she couldn't cry:
you were the first ones he forswore;
I kept in mind an ancient store
is mincing manners - nothing more.
is dressed, undressed, and dressed once more?
opens the door a tiny slot...
all egoistical and dry,
the idol that she'll most admire
its own perfection everywhere,
no spark of fun in all its rot!
Saint Petersburg's fine flower was there --
with cause that I've recalled them here.
have gnawed our bridges, and the flea
to infuriate a clumsy foe;
in deepest grasses, quite alone,
that Lensky and Eugene, apart,
and where Terpsichore alone
a place for rest. Eugene alone
his gaze at Tatyana alone --
the youth of those past days in line
broke greetings off, and gave Eugene
he knew too well that sort of scene.
But to the garden, to the scene
to all that's trivial and inane?
whose memory will preserve for me
has felt time's desiccating blast?
And here my sentiments impel me
where are the reveries this time,
and manners of an earlier time.
and for belle Nina, as it read,
cartoonist-pencils of Saint-Priest;11
to institute a new regime.
her seal with its engraven crest.
the year, his age, then: ''may your rest,
that fired his soul, to burn the same;
become a joke to us, its game,
nor turned a poet. In the burst
in sensible old-fashioned style.
my husband for his wounds in battle
Alas! the generations must,
the Russian for le comme il faut.
on which a carpet has been spread,
for happiness - that alien role.
with lampions studded all about
Nasce una gente a cui 'l morir non dole.
Today it's turn and turn about.
with deep emotion looks about
of philosophic brains, about
He nods - they start to fuss and truckle;
a girl or two, without a smile
and wasted life's fine flower meanwhile.
he even dares, once in a while,
bursts with cold envy and with bile?
How early he'd learnt to dissemble,
the household boys in noisy rout;
for hours, with elbows on the table --
a group of monsters round a table,
talk that might turn a young girl's head)
a grammar, a digest of fable,
will disappear as fast as smoke:
secretly overheard by you.
am doomed to perish, yet to die
IV
XLIV
XLIV
that nubile maid of riper age,
that in the usual Christmas scrimmage
when not quite eighteen years of age.
''But tell me who she is.'' ''My wife.''
but I've become another's wife --
XXIV
and with his dinner, and his wife.
XXXIV
XXXIV
and daily scenes of modish life
the peaceful Muses' devotee,
I hear you say. But can you see
by two small oaktrees in a ride.
had come to him in field and glade;
Farewell to you, my free existence!
It fascinates by its assurance
a few books had escaped disgrace:
has lately wintered, just a space
to aim, at steady, even pace
of pity: in his silent bow,
already yawned before the show,
swam on the river's dreaming face,
But ours, whatever he might be,
boo Phaedra out as paralytic,
to Olga's face, he whispered low
To private tastes we each subscribe:
with each nuance of wintry glow:
as yours did, Homer, godlike lord,
until the dawn beneath her pillow.
and underneath her downy pillow
the elegy, grown paralytic,
And then she broods and mopes for good,
she guards, in silence and for good,
emotion, thought, and magic sound;
her clever husband on the morrow
My soul's like crystal, and tomorrow
an offering ready for the ground.
and glittering whiteness all around.
what was it in your heart it found
Evgeny echoed him: ''My second?
in deep anxiety of mind.
in any picture of this kind:
whoever you may be, a friend,
you know I'm hard to comprehend...
a true companion to the end,
of calculated slander should,
in manifesting, as he could,
ditty of our secret world,
from her Monsieur took on the child.
Still tumbling, devil, snake and Cupid
XX
stumblingly call to mind he did
Lensky has watched: his rage has blazed,
or Freisch&uuml;tz as it might be played
and blood had bubbled as it flowed;
conclude that it's high time she wed!...
''Poor Yorick,'' said he, broken-hearted:
she sighed, and in a trance coopted
To harmless idleness devoted,
only by rule, and strict tradition
''I reckon, by God's will. My Vanya
from dish of water, rings are shifted
once on the highway he'd detected
and my whole life has been directed
they find her somewhat unexpected,
I've wasted too much life away!
sequence of dinners stretch away,
his hours to dreaming them away:
a park, enormous and neglected,
so a storm-shadow wraps away
his bow was wholly unaffected.
and then sat silent all the way.
on dining-chairs are all prostrated;
Lensky rejoiced. His designated
for aeons. Maybe it was fated
she fell in love - the hour was fated...
We each enjoy a special hobby,
words mispronounced, thoughts ill-expressed
on Eugene, he was deeply stirred:
Never come and overhear
for the first time the Muse came near.
the heartache that they bring lies deep.
punctilious in his cotton cap,
Tatyana's heart is rent in two.
would fill Tatyana from afar
made all fates look the same... and so
and Malek Adel,4 de Linar,5
and soon they bring her... a guitar
can chatter, and be silent too,
Back to his regiment the Lancer,
ask Tanya out to dine, and they
of mocking turn, or else a breeder
My love for it is just as tender,
she flies as fast as she can go;
Imagine it: quite on my own
can't really be: for we've outgrown
to bee and butterfly unknown.
not every day could he wash down
and soon his travels had begun,
last night he'd erred in making fun,
''Akulka'' the onetime Selina,
She was alone, lit by the moon.
bribe-taker, glutton and buffoon.
What folly! and what retribution!
Eugene forsakes the packed reception,
our hapless Tanya! An emotion
Deaf to her sister's intervention,
of the two girls; their premonition
At this midnight of my condition,
Tatyana, hiding her condition,
that not a syllable be uttered
if you'd still been with me, dear friend,
their lords, and thwack their palms together;
to vice, while virtue got its crown.
From all sweet things that gave me pleasure,
But you, blest husbands, to the end
our deep economist had got
Tatyana! it's addressed... to whom?
But in misfortune or displeasure,
she found, in labours and in leisure,
that's where my years of youth were spent.
XXXIX
Was it not in such sweet employment
the girl remains there in the gloom
who all his life would garner praise
moves the young watcher (as was known
to boom, to flash across the sky,
forty years long would criticise
and he was bored with social noise;
has hardly mastered postal prose.
before first light they have appointment,
Tanya looks on; her own indictment
so, cursing women's devious course,
From widow Clicquot and from Mo&euml;t,
grows, surges, boils, for lack of room
a vulgar touch. I can't translate.
roofs, flowerbeds, fences, all in white,
Is spleen his trouble, or the dumb
I'd nothing to attract your humour...
this Grandison of hers was splendid,
Now hear the friends in dialogue:
Dawn comes in mist and chill; no longer
and lovelorn maiden whom he'd known,
then, stepping nearer, Eugene said:
had only debts on which to live.
has kept him warm in chimney's blaze
''You know, it's true, how I attended,
after the martyr's price it paid,
their hopes, their pranks, their dreams at night --
Herder, and even at times a Russian --
that was less clever still by half.
tread the calm, settled path they've chosen...
could see no harm in books; himself
the barbs that envy's always spreading,
that poisonous worm, despised, degrading,
stands over my poor nurse's tomb.
In love with fame, by freedom smitten,
and dreamt that she with him one day
the darling sex is light as down.
he steers her, nonchalantly gliding,
the strophe over which I slaved;
They will receive us with delight.''
There you're entirely sure of finding
(alas, too salted); now they're bringing
and iron bridges will go arching
prince, who in that dark-red b&eacute;ret,
''the mail explains the time he's taking.''
a riding whip. Tanya keeps walking...
both hearts to blaze had now expired;
another's grin was sly and shifty,
praised his fierce courage in its day:
her heart had spoken, free as air,
to hear him howl: ''that's me!'' You'll get
I'm good for nothing now, my sweet...
Eugene as clever, and quite sweet.
Chairs are pushed outward, loudly rumbling,
here, seize it quick for this quatrain!)
had drawn Eugene's especial heed
and the young city-bred newcomer,
Silence was everywhere enthralling;
now ten has struck, his wheels are rolling,
Now Nature's tremulous, pale effect
meanwhile with a dissembler's duty
to roar of banquets, din of brawling,
they talk of her, of how and whether:
''You're wrong.'' ''But what I wonder at
in quilted coat, where rays were gleaming
through gloom and mist; and there came streaming
his news has set the party humming!
when, utterly worn out by rhyming,
of swaddling clothes - already blighted!
thank you for suffering and its joys,
Meanwhile my novel's opening section
the herdsman's horn proclaimed the morning
Tatyana dear, with you I'm weeping:
to reasoned talk, no dull hearsay,
I'm near to sobbing, near to weeping!...''
of hills has hid the moon; for certain
right from the cradle of her days;
no fuss; our belly has the power
Triquet sings, out of tune. Loud clapping
Now powder's greyish stream is slipping
craving your tolerance in season --
So down came Tanya, hardly daring
(it's all the same - you well correct us),
if I'd possessed the slightest reason
We must confess that taste deserts us
would say goodbye and drive away,
You too, prime beauties in your flower
Each day, despite the appeals of reason,
So the poor butterfly will quiver
(an attribute that's quite vexatious,
Deep down, an epigram is stirring
By now the rays of spring are chasing
she'd never join the game selected,
However has he earned so vicious,
''A humble sinner, Dimitry Larin,
''What in the world is more distressing
the crown of marriage was projected
Hurrah! let's start congratulating
Evgeny! ''Ah!'' Tatyana, fleeting
''Now don't suppose... let no suspicion...
a story that still wants completing;
On such indifference, such forgetting
a dream's mute monument, reflection
Since dawn, whole families have been driving
of secret pain... but it's now rated
to play with a dishevelled tress,
earnestly striving for persuasion
no haughty stare around the press,
this was the science of that passion
and in the role of virtuous mother
Rage died, and jealousy's obsession,
The clock of doom had struck as fated;
How often, when the sky was glowing,
To reading from this odd collection
No one will think that worth gainsaying,
were you in love when you were young?''
''Oh nyanya, nyanya, I don't question...
You'll love again, but you must teach
soon all that went without a wrench:
Yes, youth divines, in giddy madness,
I love their feet - though I confess
that sat above the stove and purred
your molten gold, your charmed infusion;
filled him with thoughts that swarmed and whirred;
past all endurance. You're referred
Who taught her all this mad, slapdash,
prevailed, and with composure steady
the winter's ways are smooth as glass.
she flies no more, she's lost her strength.
Evening, and darkening sky, and waters
fragments of poems from the North,
a gulf has gaped... Says Tanya: ''I
of spires and belfries, in a cup
III
At least you then showed for my years
and human words, and horse's stamp!
VIII
but suddenly a snowdrift rumbled,
just look, and never mind the chatter...
its pristine charm: heeltaps, and leaps,
XXVIII
XXVIII
Legends, and mystical traditions,
XIII
XXIII
the safest place for declarations,
Compassion, yes, and indignation,
the pangs with which his heart was troubled,
she yields to it without condition
of finishing its book, but early
his mind, in judgement still unsteady,
land where my heart is buried deep.
I'm wandering in a world of dreams...
VII
himself just like a simple chap.
thank God, he had no inclination
still eats and drinks enough for two.
and up the rustling curtain crawls.
she drinks it like a priceless potion;
Evgeny, full of inward laughter,
but groomed an anecdote-collection
XXVII
XXXVII
XII
I trust my fate to your direction,
he's bowed politely; his attention
XII
and parted from her by their star.
XXXII
was G&ouml;ttingen, his alma mater,
XXI
By now the sun is climbing steeply,
men's thoughts, their plots, the words they speak,
Onegin's life, you see, was holy;
along the street where slumber drowses,
Lensky all evening, in distraction,
I grasp a stirrup with affection,
heeding the press, will make us look
It all seemed new - for two days only --
I'll say: with past ideals in view
now dazzled by one thing's effulgence,
here's boredom, madness or pretence,
XXXV
XXXV
and felt himself love's invalide.
beloved friend, thou art my bride!''
behind the door the clash of glasses
breakneck by moonlight at my side!
and opened Schiller... but the embrace
a novel in Lafontaine's8 manner...
frightening with all despair's disguises,
V
and yet so light. All that is real
first snow for shoulders, breast and head:
and look, my cousin's come, Buy&aacute;nov,
the fools who sparkle far and wide,6
XLV
XLV
my carefree song would thus reveal
play on the window's frosted lace;
two sisters who'd received the initial,9
By now the sledge is at the portal --
they all have swarmed into the hall,
exercised, under lucre's banner,
her bow, as calm and as restrained.
when in the park, in the all&eacute;e
Now she's alarmed; in desperate worry
always contented with his life,
and there a tombstone says its word
shall make my story grim as hell;
mountains are piled on every carriage,
XLIV
and pale, and fade without a word!
and teaching children how to spell.
''But there'll be such a rout and scrabble
Farewell, familiar woods! Farewell,
but just to make the bargain keener,
of jealousy, to seem to tremble
her steppeland charms into a rout.3
Then in return for all this twaddle,
the days that doom has measured out.
will the benighted reason smile,
you in my arms on gingerbread?''
as horses whirled him through the dust.
it's hidden deep in gloom and dust.
your presence aches, and in my blood!
upon her lips the breathing dies,
just like, on turf, your fleeting tread.
of calm and reason, when the flame
until Br&eacute;guet's unsleeping chime
summits of aspen, birch and lime,
He sang of grief and parting-time,
to feasts and fun this winter past;
sits there beside the window-sill!
and crisply crunch the morning snow.
Throughout their life, so calm, so peaceful,
after Saint Chariton's gone past
Hm, hm. Distinguished reader, tell me
sing about something else at last!''
Maidservants on the beds just now
more tender than it used to sound.
Onegin too. ''Good Lord, at last!''
Who in that flash could not have reckoned
in Lyc&eacute;e gardens long ago,
left quite alone with his own soul,
with thoughts of him in ceaseless round.
to all the most adored actrices,
with amber pipes from Tsaregrad;12
that youthful heart. ''But now at least
the first will never find fruition,
with the pink glow the snows assume
the two foes stand with eyes downcast.
was that calm brow of one who swooned.
his mother taps the window-pane.
and doctors, he'd have died in bed.
Clarissa, Julie, or Delphine6 --
I'm much afraid that bilberry wine
No tearstains, nothing. Wrath alone
some other, older spring will gleam,
she doesn't see, or doesn't mind;
of modish belles the modish foe,
has driven off, to find his own.
sings as he plaits a humble shoe.
From here, deep-sunk in pensive woe,
they met on horseback; quickly they
XIX
Just let yourself be your whole care,
the uncertainties within his heart;
and cattle roamed the plain, and here
unspeaking, too, but stretched out there
There's vacancies in plenty there.''
a young girl's looking-glass is kept.
to pass the evening. No? then tot
Of Lensky's fate they said no more --
